[Amit Varma]: If you're listening to this podcast right now, you're one of the luckiest people on
[Amit Varma]: the planet.
[Amit Varma]: And no, that's not because this is an awesome podcast, which of course it is, but because
[Amit Varma]: you have both access to technology and the leisure time to listen, which so many people
[Amit Varma]: do not.
[Amit Varma]: We often take a good fortune for granted, which we should not, especially in India.
[Amit Varma]: The truth is that most people here live precarious lives, one medical emergency or natural calamity
[Amit Varma]: from being broke.
[Amit Varma]: And COVID-19 was one such calamity.
[Amit Varma]: Millions of Indians living lives on the edge were pushed into joblessness or poverty when
[Amit Varma]: the lockdown hit and their work dried up.
[Amit Varma]: Our immediate priority then was the virus.
[Amit Varma]: The virus could kill you, but you also had to eat to stay alive.
[Unknown]: What if you couldn't?
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Chances are that most of you listening to this, like me, don't worry about hunger.
[Amit Varma]: We know where our next meal is going to come from and it should cause a jolt of recognition
[Amit Varma]: that it's not like this for much of India.
[Amit Varma]: The lockdown made this clear.
[Amit Varma]: As our cities and public services shut down, the problem of hunger exploded.
[Amit Varma]: People in our slums no longer had easy access to work, no longer got paid, and they often
[Amit Varma]: lived from meal to meal.
[Amit Varma]: Our migrant workers were in an even more precarious position, finding it important to get away
[Amit Varma]: from the city that had abandoned them and also finding it hard to get food.
[Amit Varma]: My guest today, Ruben Mascarenas, has been an activist from his early teens, throwing
[Amit Varma]: himself into local causes to make the world a better place.
[Amit Varma]: When he heard about the problem of hunger in March last year, he got together with some
[Amit Varma]: fellow activists and started a campaign called Khana Chahiye.
[Amit Varma]: They began by distributing more than a thousand meals on March 29 and had ramped it up to
[Amit Varma]: deliver 47 lakh meals, that's 4.7 million meals, by August.
[Amit Varma]: They fed the homeless on the streets of Mumbai, they fed slum dwellers who were suddenly jobless,
[Amit Varma]: they set up position in the arterial roads out of Mumbai and in its railway stations
[Amit Varma]: to feed migrant workers on their way out.
[Amit Varma]: Poor Ruben also ended up catching COVID during this time and is still feeling the aftereffects.
[Amit Varma]: I thought Khana Chahiye was a remarkable initiative, an example of how the voluntary actions of
[Amit Varma]: private citizens can help society when the dysfunctional and parasitic state seems invisible.
[Amit Varma]: I invited Ruben to share his insights from this great campaign to feed the hungry and
[Amit Varma]: also from his many years in politics.
[Amit Varma]: Ruben is one of those activists who believes that clean politics can turbocharge activism.
[Amit Varma]: He worked for the India Against Corruption movement a decade ago and is today a National
[Amit Varma]: Joint Secretary of the Aam Aadmi Party.
[Amit Varma]: Now, I am not a fan of this party and I discussed some of my criticisms in an earlier episode
[Amit Varma]: with Ashwit Mahesh, one of India's finest public intellectuals and also a member of
[Amit Varma]: AAP.
[Amit Varma]: I'll link that from the show notes.
[Amit Varma]: After talking about Khana Chahiye and local activism in the first half of this conversation,
[Amit Varma]: I brought up my criticism of AAP in the second half, in the context of how the will to power
[Amit Varma]: can corrode any principles that a politician may have within this Indian system.
[Amit Varma]: To me, the Aam Aadmi Party is an illustration of this and when I raised this matter, things
[Amit Varma]: got somewhat combative, Ruben, after all, is a loyal party worker.
[Amit Varma]: I'm sure you'll find that part of the discussion thought provoking, regardless of which of
[Amit Varma]: us you agree more with, which doesn't really matter.
[Amit Varma]: What's important is that two people with different views can have a fierce disagreement like
[Amit Varma]: this while being polite and respectful.
[Amit Varma]: If we'd had that conversation on Twitter, hundred other people would have jumped in
[Amit Varma]: and it would have been a dogfight.
[Amit Varma]: Before we started chatting about power though, we spoke about hunger and empathy.
[Amit Varma]: And before you start listening to this conversation, take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: When I first started podcasting, I had no idea of what a powerful medium this is.
[Amit Varma]: Over time, I realized that podcasting allows you to go both deeper and broader than any
[Amit Varma]: other medium.
[Amit Varma]: And the insane level of engagement that listeners have with good podcasts is also unique to
[Amit Varma]: podcasting.
[Amit Varma]: What's more?
[Amit Varma]: Anyone can start a podcast.
[Amit Varma]: You don't need a license from anyone.
[Amit Varma]: You don't need a radio voice.
[Amit Varma]: You don't even need lots of money.
[Amit Varma]: So if this is something you'd like to learn, I'd be glad to teach you.
[Amit Varma]: Registration is now open for the February cohort of my online course, The Art of Podcasting.
[Amit Varma]: Over three webinars on three Sundays, I share my high level conceptual learnings, as well
[Amit Varma]: as the nitty gritties of recording, hosting, distribution, and building your brand.
[Amit Varma]: The course costs rupees 10,000 plus GST or about $150.
[Amit Varma]: Head on over to seen unseen.in slash learn for more details and to sign up.
[Amit Varma]: This might be the last month I teach this specific course.
[Amit Varma]: So hey, don't procrastinate classes start on February 7.
[Amit Varma]: So sign up now at seen unseen.in slash learn.
[Amit Varma]: Ruben, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Guest]: An absolute honor to be here after following your show religiously all these years.
[Amit Varma]: That's so kind of you to say that.
[Amit Varma]: And I just want to begin the show by expressing my admiration for all the incredible work
[Amit Varma]: you've done in the last few months.
[Amit Varma]: Not to say you haven't done incredible work before that.
[Amit Varma]: But I want to start off by asking, you know, you've just recovered from COVID.
[Amit Varma]: And you got COVID not being lazy, but being helpful by actually being out there on the
[Amit Varma]: streets and organizing food for people who didn't otherwise have food, which is fairly
[Amit Varma]: incredible.
[Guest]: But before we get on to that, how are you doing now?
[Guest]: Much better.
[Guest]: But there is post COVID fatigue.
[Guest]: And there is, you know, there are shortness of breath.
[Guest]: Even if I walk for about 200 meters, I end up panting.
[Guest]: I did see the doctor.
[Guest]: And that's one of the post COVID phenomena, which most people seem to be grappling with.
[Guest]: And how long back did you get COVID?
[Guest]: So this was in the end of October, and by the second week of November, I was, I was
[Amit Varma]: out.
[Amit Varma]: Wow.
[Amit Varma]: Okay.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, good to see that you're fine.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you know, what I want to do during this episode is sort of talk about your entire
[Amit Varma]: political journey, right from when you started, you once mentioned to me in a WhatsApp message
[Amit Varma]: that two people who've been an influence on you have been JP Narayan and Ashwin Mahesh.
[Amit Varma]: Both of whom are sort of heroes of mine for their, you know, their intellectual prowess
[Amit Varma]: and who've been guests on the show multiple times, both of them.
[Amit Varma]: So I kind of want to follow that entire journey of yours.
[Amit Varma]: But before we do, I want to sort of talk about the last few months and Khana Chahiye.
[Amit Varma]: So COVID happens, lockdown begins, at what point did it strike you that there is a problem
[Guest]: and it needs to be solved?
[Guest]: So I think as the lockdown was announced, we were inundated with a lot of calls from
[Guest]: frantic people.
[Guest]: As regards to, there are people who are going hungry and, you know, if demonetization was
[Guest]: demonetization, this was demobilization.
[Guest]: So you had your working class, your informal sector, daily wage laborers, all of their
[Guest]: livelihood that suddenly got paused, I mean, all of their wages suddenly got paused, they
[Guest]: were struggling to make their ends meet.
[Guest]: And of course, this was also the time that the lockdown was being implemented very, very
[Guest]: strictly by the police.
[Guest]: So you know, you wouldn't even have people in the road.
[Guest]: So we're a bunch of people.
[Guest]: So we call ourselves the Litmus Test Project.
[Guest]: And you know, I reached out to a few of my friends.
[Guest]: And again, Khana Chahiye, thank you for the compliments earlier, but that's a team effort.
[Guest]: So I have six co-founders, there is Shishir Joshi, there is Rakesh Singh, there is Swaraj,
[Guest]: there's Anik, there's restauranteur Neeti and there's me.
[Guest]: So it's them and of course, over 400 plus volunteers, most of whom responded to our
[Guest]: call to action online.
[Guest]: And that's again, thanks to Swaraj, who I believe is one of the best mobilizers we have
[Guest]: in India right now.
[Guest]: But that apart, we started receiving these frantic SOS calls.
[Guest]: So we said, okay, let's do this.
[Guest]: Let's try and quantify the demand.
[Guest]: Let's see where are these calls coming from and why are they not getting food?
[Guest]: Is it that they don't have the apparatus to cook?
[Guest]: Is it because they're stuck in distress and they're not being paid their wages?
[Guest]: Let's try and understand this better, let's try and deep dive.
[Guest]: So in a few days, we saw that, okay, this seems to be more or less around arterial roads
[Guest]: of Mumbai.
[Guest]: So we picked the Western Express highway and said, okay, let's just make 1200 meals.
[Guest]: And let's start from Bandra and go towards Borivdi.
[Guest]: That's about 25 kilometers of highway and below every flyover and on every footpath,
[Guest]: we would stop there and we would talk to people.
[Guest]: And I think it was heartbreaking.
[Guest]: It was gut wrenching because you had people who hadn't eaten food in days.
[Guest]: And of course, the silver lining in all of this was, and I think that's for me the story
[Guest]: of the pandemic, that even though they needed food more than the people with them, they
[Guest]: would make sure that everybody has something.
[Guest]: And that's when we realized that the problem is much bigger than any of us who live in
[Guest]: our privileged bubbles or gated communities can even begin to comprehend.
[Guest]: And we said, okay, we need to do something.
[Guest]: And obviously, I don't understand food production and food manufacturing.
[Guest]: So we had a Neeti, we had a Munaf.
[Guest]: And I told him, you're restauranteurs, you run catering businesses, how does the food
[Guest]: bit work?
[Guest]: And then we realized on the supply side, there are a lot of restaurants which are lying shut.
[Guest]: So you actually had a network of unused kitchen capacity, which we said, okay, so we now have
[Guest]: kitchen capacity on this side, we've quantified demand on the other side, can we marry the
[Guest]: two and raise resources for that?
[Guest]: And that's when we started a crowdfunding campaign, which was with Effort for Good,
[Guest]: which was a partner, Anurag Mazumdar has been kind enough to support us there.
[Guest]: And yeah, I think the response was fantastic.
[Guest]: So a lot of people started donating, then we realized that we as a team need to expand
[Guest]: and grow.
[Guest]: I remember I just put up a post on Facebook saying, look, I'm going to do something like
[Guest]: this.
[Guest]: Of course, Shishir has been like a backbone, because we obviously needed to take all the
[Guest]: money into an account.
[Guest]: I mean, because all of us are essentially working professionals, and all our organizations
[Guest]: are not charitable organizations per se.
[Guest]: So Shishir just took two minutes when I called him and said, look, I'm doing something like
[Guest]: this.
[Guest]: And I like to collaborate.
[Guest]: And you know, he came on board, we then got all of my friends.
[Guest]: So we're the same group of people who worked with the Election Commission for this in the
[Guest]: last elections in 2017, and increased Mumbai's voting percentage for the first time ever
[Guest]: by 13%.
[Guest]: So this is a very interesting bunch of people, which does things from time to time.
[Guest]: And I was honestly really frustrated being cooped up at home.
[Guest]: I mean, I really, now that I look back, I don't know how else would I spend the lockdown
[Guest]: if I hadn't been doing Khaan Naa Chege.
[Guest]: So yeah, so we went to the Western Express Highway on the 29th of March, and we saw that
[Guest]: the problem is much bigger.
[Guest]: Then we raised some funds, we started supplying about 20,000 meals a day across the arterial
[Guest]: roads of Mumbai.
[Guest]: So you had the Eastern Express Highway, you had the LBS Road, you have the SV Road, you
[Guest]: have the Link Road, so on and so forth.
[Guest]: And then the good part about working with the team is that now the entire operation
[Guest]: got decentralized.
[Guest]: There were a lot of learning.
[Guest]: So we actually went out to the BMC and said, Okay, we know you're also doing your best,
[Guest]: how can we do this better?
[Guest]: So you tell us what your weak places are, and maybe we can adopt them and things like
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: And, and yeah, I think there was no looking back from that.
[Guest]: So I think from a 20,000 in the first few days, we quickly reached, at our peak, we
[Guest]: were 1 lakh meals a day.
[Guest]: And I think on an average, we were about 70,000 meals a day.
[Amit Varma]: So that's, that's insane, a bunch of follow up questions.
[Amit Varma]: One is when you say at the start, people reached out to you.
[Amit Varma]: Now one who reached out to you, and two, why you and I'm guessing it's partly because all
[Amit Varma]: the organizations that you've been part of, and so on, you've, you know, built a reputation
[Amit Varma]: over time of being people who are actually out there and do things and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: So kind of take me through the process.
[Amit Varma]: Was it other activists reaching out to you?
[Guest]: So, so it was other activists reaching out to me, it was friends reaching out to me,
[Guest]: because I've always been, you know, that guy who does something about the situation, no
[Guest]: matter what the situation is, at least that's the most, that's the image that they have
[Guest]: of me.
[Guest]: And well, initially, the activists were like, there are a lot of people going hungry.
[Guest]: And we know for a fact that they're going hungry.
[Guest]: We can't go there because, you know, we were hearing reports of the police was clacking
[Guest]: down really badly on anyone who is outside.
[Guest]: So even they were concerned as to how should they go about and help people, even if they
[Guest]: wanted to.
[Guest]: Second is outside gated communities.
[Guest]: I think for the first time, in, I think, recent memory, we would have seen a lot of people
[Guest]: just outside their slums, just, just just staying there because they didn't have anything
[Guest]: to eat.
[Guest]: And it was really, really, really, really sad.
[Guest]: So while on one level, we could see the dolphins in the Arabian Sea, and we could see all sorts
[Guest]: of flora and fauna return outside our balconies and our gated communities, you also had.
[Guest]: So while you had empty roads on one side, you actually had the slum clusters, where
[Guest]: people were really facing acute food shortages.
[Guest]: So, so look at it, let me give you one case in point.
[Guest]: The slum right next to my building, which is Premnagar in Juhu, I went there and I was
[Guest]: interacting with a bunch of workers, these are young people, young boys, I do play football,
[Guest]: so that's how I know them.
[Guest]: And, you know, I just wanted to check on them as to what's going on.
[Guest]: And they were all labourers.
[Guest]: So some of them were auto rickshaw drivers, all of them were basically staying on rent.
[Guest]: And they would just pull in the rent and you know, they would just go out to a mess service
[Guest]: and there were a bunch of bachelors and I asked them, you know, how are you doing and
[Guest]: they mentioned that in some cases where they were working for a contractor, the contractors
[Guest]: are unavailable.
[Guest]: Some of them were construction site labourers, and they just have a few hundred rupees, they
[Guest]: don't know how are they going to go back.
[Guest]: And it's all chaotic.
[Guest]: And this was also the time that COVID hadn't been as normalised as it is right now.
[Guest]: So there was a lot of many unknowns about about it back then.
[Guest]: Yeah, so all of them were just really, really scared as to the disease is going to come
[Guest]: and get them.
[Guest]: They're not with family, because they had really experienced a facet of the city that
[Guest]: nobody else had experienced, or rather, you know, their experience the most ugliest side
[Guest]: of the city actually had, because look at it from their lens, their landlord was demanding
[Guest]: rent irrespective, it didn't matter, their mess service was demanding their fees, irrespective,
[Guest]: their wages were paused, they were not being able to do anything whatsoever.
[Guest]: And they're like, hey, we just have like a few hundred rupees.
[Guest]: And you know, that's all that we actually have, how we to feed ourselves, how we to,
[Guest]: you know, help our family, some of whom are here, some of whom are not here, and how we
[Guest]: to get back.
[Guest]: And that's when I realised that the problem is really, really big.
[Guest]: So it's not the homeless, that's just one part of the story.
[Guest]: The bigger part of the story are slum clusters, which are entire slum populations, which have
[Guest]: suddenly are now living in abject conditions.
[Guest]: And this was again, initial days after which then we saw the migrant worker exodus.
[Guest]: And that's another epic saga in itself.
[Guest]: So when I cross checked what I was hearing, and actually saw in the slum, I was convinced
[Guest]: that this problem is much bigger than I think anyone can wrap their head around.
[Amit Varma]: And at some level, isn't this much more than a COVID problem?
[Amit Varma]: Like, I remember I wrote a column a few months back about how I think I wrote it in April
[Amit Varma]: about how we are dealing with two disasters.
[Amit Varma]: One is of course COVID, but the other is a flailing state, which has been with us for
[Amit Varma]: more than 70 years, in the sense that like, when I was looking up statistics for that,
[Amit Varma]: I found that 3000 children die of hunger every day in India, one in four Indian children
[Amit Varma]: below a certain age is malnourished.
[Amit Varma]: So it seems like an ongoing disaster.
[Amit Varma]: And yet we normalise all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And we completely ignore it, especially those of us who are in our elite bubbles, we simply
[Amit Varma]: don't notice.
[Amit Varma]: And then a disaster like this happens.
[Amit Varma]: And we say, Oh, shit, people are going hungry as if they weren't anyway, you know.
[Amit Varma]: And what also strikes me is that, whereas, you know, people like you and me who have
[Amit Varma]: some kind of a safety net, we don't have to earn money next month, we can manage, right.
[Amit Varma]: But most people in this country, you know, the vast majority, definitely more than 99%,
[Amit Varma]: I would go so far as to say, live very precarious lives, the slightest disruption can just be
[Amit Varma]: a personal disaster.
[Amit Varma]: Is that something you had a sense of from before or during this time?
[Amit Varma]: Did you, you know, were things worse than you had imagined?
[Guest]: So I think, because we're essentially activists at the end of the day, and we work on the
[Guest]: ground.
[Guest]: So we know the precarious lives that, you know, people live, especially when it comes
[Guest]: to the informal sector, which makes up a bulk of our workforce.
[Guest]: So we were mindful of that.
[Guest]: But the situation would be so bad that people would demand rent irrespective, the situation
[Guest]: would be so bad that their contractors would suddenly stop responding to their calls.
[Guest]: I mean, at one site, we actually had an entire team of construction workers just there, and
[Guest]: they didn't know what to do, because the contractor is missing in action, they have not been paid
[Guest]: their wages, so they don't know where to go.
[Guest]: I mean, it was ridiculous, ridiculous to another level.
[Guest]: So that's when we realized that we have to do something.
[Guest]: And I think coming back to the point that you were making about, you know, poverty and
[Guest]: hunger being normalized, I think COVID just amplified inequality, like never before.
[Guest]: So while you can argue that state capacity was overwhelmed by the sheer pressure due to a pandemic,
[Guest]: and that's true in many ways.
[Guest]: But the opposite argument is also equally true, that we had a broken system in a very
[Guest]: long time, that we didn't really have functional public healthcare, we didn't have our primary
[Guest]: healthcare centers.
[Guest]: I mean, all said and done, why did we have to go around setting up these fever clinics?
[Guest]: And why are we sending people to tertiary hospitals?
[Guest]: What happened to our primary healthcare system?
[Guest]: What happened to our PDS, which was essentially supposed to distribute food for people in
[Guest]: need.
[Guest]: And then it's only now that Prime Minister Modi has now spoken about one ration, one
[Guest]: nation scheme, but you would hear horror stories that we have our ration card back in the village,
[Guest]: but we can't essentially get ration here.
[Guest]: So the system has always been broken.
[Guest]: But I think COVID just amplified that to an extent that I think any individual with an
[Guest]: iota of conscience can't ignore.
[Guest]: I mean, if you're just going to look out of the window, and you're going to just going
[Guest]: to see hungry people, how can food rest in your stomach?
[Amit Varma]: So something had to be done.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, so let's get to some of the fascinating nitty gritties of this.
[Amit Varma]: So for example, you said that, you know, at the supply end, we had unused kitchen capacity,
[Amit Varma]: which is of course true, because everyone shut.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, are they still manned?
[Amit Varma]: Who actually goes there and cooks and some of the restaurants who were involved were
[Amit Varma]: like people like nom nom, who are not cooking that kind of food, for example, what's the
[Amit Varma]: thinking process when you say, okay, what is the food we want to give them?
[Amit Varma]: How do we handle the logistics?
[Guest]: Where do we get the grain from?
[Guest]: Yeah, so all of this was so I mean, 70,000 meals, even in non COVID context is a lot
[Guest]: of food and is a lot of effort.
[Guest]: So certainly during COVID times and during lockdown, logistics was certainly an issue.
[Guest]: The good thing is thanks to somebody like Neeti, thanks to somebody like Prana who are,
[Guest]: you know, seasoned restauranters, we could speak to APMC directly, we could speak to
[Guest]: farmers directly to source raw materials and agricultural produce.
[Guest]: So that was taken care of.
[Guest]: On the other side, staff, right?
[Guest]: Because many of these staff didn't really have passes.
[Guest]: And that's when we approached the BMC and said, listen, we're trying to do good and
[Guest]: you need to sort of help us with these passes because these guys are getting backed when
[Guest]: they're going to the hotel to cook food and stuff like that.
[Guest]: So if my staff doesn't reach the hotel, or the restaurant, how do they cook?
[Guest]: So the good thing about working with the restaurant is that they already had a functional kitchen
[Guest]: with FSSAI licenses, and they had a clean, hygienic environment to cook in, which was
[Guest]: again a challenge if you would start something from scratch, so you rather you put to use
[Guest]: a utility which exists.
[Guest]: And thanks to a person like Munaf who understands how food is cooked, we actually approached
[Guest]: a nutritionist, Monal Shah, as to how, what is it that we feed these people?
[Guest]: I mean, we don't want to give something which, A, is not nutritious, B, given the fact that
[Guest]: they may have long intervals of not having access to food, you know, it should not have
[Guest]: an adverse reaction on their body.
[Guest]: And that's when we realized, and that's what they suggested that it should be a rice based
[Guest]: nutritious meal.
[Guest]: So we had khichdi, we had sabzi, and we started off with that, but then, because our volunteers,
[Guest]: so they're called food ninjas, because a lot of them, at the end of the day, decided to
[Guest]: volunteer at great personal risk, they would go to these communities and distribute food
[Guest]: day after day.
[Guest]: And then again, there is a detegrity there too, because rather than giving two food twice
[Guest]: a day, we said, let's give it once, because when it comes to the lockdown and the curfew
[Guest]: at night, we don't really know what the security connotations of the whole operation would
[Guest]: be.
[Guest]: So just to play it safe, we would give a large 400-450 gram packet, which was good enough
[Guest]: for a person who could eat that meal twice a day.
[Guest]: But while we were giving them this food, after a few days, we got a feedback that, hey, we
[Guest]: know now, this is going to continue for some time now, we'd like some variety.
[Guest]: And we then went back to the restaurant and said, okay, these guys are like family now.
[Guest]: So we call them our community mobilizers.
[Guest]: And this is the feedback that we're hearing.
[Guest]: So we started an experiment with roti and sabzi, we've done pav bhaji, we've on special
[Guest]: occasions, given them some sweet dish, we've added Ramzan food packets in Muslim areas
[Guest]: so that, you know, we changed the rotation of the distribution timing so that they could
[Guest]: have something early in the morning and have something late in the evening.
[Guest]: And we would put fruits, we would put khajoor, that is dates and all of that.
[Guest]: So yeah, I mean, it was it was fairly exciting.
[Guest]: It was certainly not the same operation that the same food is going to the same person
[Guest]: for all these five, six months, we managed to get in some variety.
[Amit Varma]: And yeah, it was fun.
[Amit Varma]: That's fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: Because, you know, initially, when I heard about this, I thought, okay, migrant laborers,
[Amit Varma]: construction workers, and so on, you're giving them food and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, you were actually at a lot of places, one you've pointed out, you were at
[Amit Varma]: all the arterial roads, you're on the Thane Nasik road, and you're on all those places
[Amit Varma]: which people are passing through.
[Amit Varma]: But you're also at slum pockets and people who are actually staying here, you're giving
[Amit Varma]: them sort of their regular meals and all of that.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So we started with the homeless on Mumbai streets.
[Guest]: And you know, as soon as we started word quickly got around that, hey, these guys, you know,
[Guest]: we don't know who they are, but they show up and they distribute food.
[Guest]: So we started getting requests from the slum clusters.
[Guest]: So we would send our volunteers there, do a basic housekeeping check, you know, is the
[Guest]: demand real?
[Guest]: Are the people for real?
[Guest]: What is the size of the community?
[Guest]: And then depending upon the resources we could mobilize, we will start distributing food.
[Guest]: But then so first were the arterial roads, then were the slum clusters.
[Guest]: After the slum clusters was as close to apocalypse that I think I've seen, which is the migrant
[Guest]: workers literally trudging on the road.
[Guest]: And I remember Neeti Goyal, my colleague reached out to me and she said that, she says in Chembur
[Guest]: and I say in Juhu, but she was like, you know, I'm just coming from the highway and there
[Guest]: are hundreds of people on the road.
[Guest]: And I couldn't believe her as to, you know, why are there hundreds of people on the road?
[Guest]: And I actually went there and it was really, really, really earth shattering the scene.
[Guest]: You had people just walking on the roads and you know, I stopped a few people and I said,
[Guest]: where are you going?
[Guest]: And they were like, what are we going to do here because we don't have anything to eat.
[Guest]: Some of them were actually from containment zones.
[Guest]: So they were not even getting the regular supply of food, which we say otherwise would
[Guest]: have got.
[Guest]: So people like us could may have maybe gone to the nearest vegetable vendor and got what
[Guest]: we wanted.
[Guest]: But because they were in a containment zone, they weren't even being able to access that.
[Guest]: And we said, okay, something needs to be done just as we were distributing food.
[Guest]: But then we realized it's not food, food that they need because they're walking.
[Guest]: And we set up our first relief operations at Majivada Junction, which is on the Mumbai
[Guest]: Agra Highway, just outside of Mumbai in Thane.
[Guest]: And we were distributing fruits, we were distributing water, we were distributing biscuits, we were
[Guest]: distributing theplas, dry snacks, savories, at least something, you know, which would
[Guest]: help them while on their journey.
[Guest]: Because look at the context of the whole thing.
[Guest]: This was still the time that railways were shut.
[Guest]: So there were no trains functioning.
[Guest]: There was no public transport.
[Guest]: The only public transport which had been announced was extremely haphazard because the state
[Guest]: said that, okay, we're going to ferry you from a particular point to the border and
[Guest]: you're supposed to cross the border and you're supposed to find something in the next state.
[Guest]: And you have to continue to hitchhike like this till you reach your destination.
[Guest]: Now you have families, you have women, you have children, you have senior citizens.
[Guest]: I mean, just imagine the extent of the calamity.
[Guest]: And I still remember on day one, I remember the police was cracking down on them.
[Guest]: And they were running into the mangroves parallel to the highway.
[Guest]: And I remember stopping the car and, you know, confronting a policeman saying, why are you
[Guest]: beating these people?
[Guest]: And if you've announced buses from a particular spot, they're obviously trying to get there.
[Guest]: So they showed me, you know, they took out a small folded piece of paper from their pocket.
[Guest]: And one of them was like, this is a doctor certificate that I paid money for.
[Guest]: Because I don't know which doctors were they and what ethics they had, but a large number
[Guest]: of them had actually paid for that certificate, which for them would enable them to get onto
[Guest]: the bus.
[Guest]: And that was the last money that they had.
[Guest]: But they're just with backpacks, they don't have food, they don't have access to water.
[Guest]: They're worried that the police will crack down and beat them away.
[Guest]: I mean, it was just something which really, really moved us and we said, okay, if this
[Guest]: is the situation on Thane, then it's also true for Vashi on the Mumbai-Bangalore highway.
[Guest]: And it is also true for Dahisar on the Mumbai-Surat highway, the Mumbai-Gujarat highway.
[Guest]: So we set up these three relief sites.
[Guest]: And I remember going there myself the first two days.
[Guest]: And I think I was heartbroken.
[Guest]: I remember, I think, three, four images with me.
[Guest]: I remember a family, nearly seven people, somehow, you know, who were somehow accommodated
[Guest]: themselves in a small rickshaw.
[Guest]: And they had stopped by saying, we're going all the way to Uttar Pradesh, because we don't
[Guest]: have anything, any transport.
[Guest]: This is the only transport that we have.
[Guest]: We've carried some additional fuel and we'll somehow, you know, drive past there and we
[Guest]: want some food because we don't really have food.
[Guest]: We spent our money with all of these arrangements and I gave them that.
[Guest]: I mean, we gave them food and the second scene was even worse.
[Guest]: I saw a few boys, they were riding what seemed like new cycles.
[Guest]: So I stopped them and I asked them that, hey, where are you going?
[Guest]: And they're saying, we're going all the way to Koraput and Orissa.
[Guest]: And I asked them, are you serious?
[Guest]: You know, that's in the other end of the country.
[Guest]: And they're like, what do we do, sir?
[Guest]: We were here as sales boys and this was the last money that we have.
[Guest]: And we've invested in this bicycle.
[Guest]: This is something that we've paid 4000 rupees for.
[Guest]: And we're going to cycle all the way there.
[Guest]: And they didn't have water, they didn't have access to washrooms.
[Guest]: And yeah, if you ask me, I think it was a collapse of governance at so many levels.
[Guest]: I mean, how difficult is it for the administration or for the collector to just make some arrangements
[Guest]: on the highway?
[Guest]: Or how difficult is it to ensure that people at least have water and biscuits or something?
[Guest]: You know, the children, they're just crying, I still remember.
[Guest]: And then the absolute chaos at these junctions.
[Guest]: I still remember Majivada Junction, sorry, I'm going into the depth of it.
[Guest]: But I think it will help your listeners understand the extent of the problem.
[Guest]: And you had these people just squat on the road.
[Guest]: And I would ask them as to what they were doing.
[Guest]: And they're like, all the buses are done for today, we can't possibly go back and come
[Guest]: back tomorrow.
[Guest]: So we're going to wait here.
[Guest]: And the police didn't really have information.
[Guest]: Buses were very difficult to come by.
[Guest]: And this was still the early days that the administration was trying to get it back together.
[Guest]: And it was just sad.
[Guest]: And as evening, so the deadline for the buses would be approximately six o'clock.
[Guest]: So all the people who could get themselves into a bus would would basically get onto
[Guest]: a bus.
[Guest]: And after that, I would see there would be trucks lined up, right ahead of Majivada straight
[Guest]: going on that road, which goes towards Kalyan.
[Guest]: And I remember, okay, I remember going to one of these trucks and you know, each of
[Guest]: them, each truck had like, dozens of people, and all of them just waiting for the police
[Guest]: barricades to be relaxed a little and they would just basically get out.
[Guest]: And that's how most people have actually traveled on in trucks, hitchhike through buses in the
[Guest]: total absence of, of support for migrants.
[Guest]: That's when we were working with the BMC administration.
[Guest]: So by this time, we were really distributing food in those areas of the BMC couldn't distributed
[Guest]: food.
[Guest]: Sometimes the BMC had sponsors who maybe had the money but didn't really know how to go
[Guest]: about the operation.
[Guest]: So we set up the operation for them at the most optimally low price and you know, help
[Guest]: them with it and etc.
[Guest]: So this is when Mr. Jaiswal, who happens to be the Additional Municipal Commissioner reached
[Guest]: out to us and said, we're starting the stomach trains, can you be kind enough to supply food?
[Guest]: And we went to, I still remember the first stomach train was leaving Kurla Terminus at
[Guest]: 1am at night.
[Guest]: And I was told that because these trains have no pantries, there is no avenue for them to
[Guest]: basically get their food and some of them have carried whatever.
[Guest]: But let's remember that these are people who already sort of sold their belongings because
[Guest]: they were in a rental place, they really were leaving the city for good because they thought
[Guest]: that the village would be at least better than the city.
[Guest]: The city had, I think all of us, all of us in urban India should hang our heads in shame
[Guest]: that for whatever reason, our workforce felt insecure, and for some reason, didn't really
[Guest]: believe in us.
[Guest]: And maybe it's because of the way we behave with them.
[Guest]: And we said, okay, we'll start with distributing food.
[Guest]: And I remember going to the railway station at about 12.30 at night.
[Guest]: And it was just in time for the first train to leave.
[Guest]: And I talked to a few of these people, and they had come in BST buses from slums.
[Guest]: And all of them had, you know, signed up at the local police station, giving applications
[Guest]: as to where they wanted to go.
[Guest]: So they were grouped and the police would then call them and there was a systematic
[Guest]: operation, which was in place there.
[Guest]: So yeah, so I immediately got back to Mr. Jaiswal and said that no, we are going to
[Guest]: adopt three of Mumbai's four terminuses.
[Guest]: So we adopted VT, which is also known as CST, the Bandra terminus and the Lokmanya Dilak
[Guest]: terminus in Kurla.
[Guest]: And yeah, till date, we have serviced over 284 Shamik trains, each train has on an average
[Guest]: anywhere between 2000 and 2500 people.
[Guest]: That depends upon how many bogies that a train has, and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: But yeah, I think in all, between the relief operations at the transit points, and the
[Guest]: Shamik train operations, the railway operations, we've supported over six and a half lakh migrant
[Guest]: workers with food while they were going back to their villages.
[Amit Varma]: That's insane.
[Amit Varma]: And a lot of this is so heartbreaking.
[Amit Varma]: And there are a number of kind of thoughts that come.
[Amit Varma]: One is what you just said about how this should be a wake up call for all those of us urban
[Amit Varma]: professionals who don't kind of notice this.
[Amit Varma]: And I think in many ways, we live in cities full of invisible people, right?
[Amit Varma]: We are in our own cocoon, whether it's you know, we are at a car and we don't notice
[Amit Varma]: who's what's happening on the signal around us or people on the streets, whether they're
[Amit Varma]: homeless people or beggars or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: You know, we live in our own little cocoons, everybody is invisible to us.
[Amit Varma]: And we also sort of take a lot for granted, like, you know, one of the most sort of heartbreaking
[Amit Varma]: images from the stories I hear about partition, for example, had to do with trains.
[Amit Varma]: So you'd have a train going from one country to the other.
[Amit Varma]: And when it arrives, it's full of dead bodies, because everybody's been killed.
[Amit Varma]: And similarly, we heard stories during this time, that migrant workers get on a train
[Amit Varma]: to get somewhere.
[Amit Varma]: And three days later, because they've had no food, they're not...
[Guest]: The government initially in parliament said that they don't have data.
[Guest]: It was only after consistent follow up by a few MPs, and I remember Sanjay Singh, our
[Guest]: MP had taken up the issue in a very big way, that the government then came up with a figure.
[Guest]: But I'm confident that even if they wouldn't have died in the train, you're talking about
[Guest]: people in some cases, like, I don't know, we did this in Mumbai, I'm sure this was true
[Guest]: for every major city in India.
[Guest]: And there were a lot of trains leaving out of the city.
[Guest]: So there were a lot of trains leaving from the Vasais and the Kalyans, the world that
[Guest]: we couldn't even reach there.
[Guest]: So we could do what we did in Mumbai.
[Guest]: And clearly, you're talking about people who've been eating once a day for the last few days.
[Guest]: This was the last money that they actually had sold all their belongings and you know,
[Guest]: they're just moving to the next city and now that they don't have food for like the next
[Guest]: three days, while they're going to their native places, I mean, just think about it.
[Guest]: How more gut wrenching can it basically get?
[Guest]: So I think, irrespective of what the government may say on paper, I am confident that a number
[Guest]: of people would have passed away just because of sheer exhaustion, both mental and physical.
[Guest]: And of course, the fact that they didn't get food.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, I saw a panel discussion of yours on YouTube where a gentleman asked you a question,
[Amit Varma]: and he spoke about how one of his workers actually boarded one of these trains, got
[Amit Varma]: fed by you guys, but then died three days later, because three days there was no food.
[Amit Varma]: And the other thing that also strikes me here, like when you were telling me stories of these
[Amit Varma]: people on the highway, who are like one, of course, even at a time like this, there is
[Amit Varma]: this incredible scamminess where you have doctors taking money to give out these freaking
[Amit Varma]: certificates or selling cycles or whatever, and I assume making a fast buck there.
[Amit Varma]: And what also strikes me is a kind of poverty that we don't notice when we talk about poverty.
[Amit Varma]: Like when we talk about poverty, typically we'll think about not having money, not having
[Amit Varma]: a roof over your head or having enough to eat.
[Amit Varma]: There's also a poverty of information.
[Amit Varma]: Throughout this period, people like you and me, we've got our mobile phones, we've got
[Amit Varma]: the internet, we are informed about what's happening, right?
[Amit Varma]: We kind of know what's happening, despite the fact that there is a sort of a fog of
[Amit Varma]: war situation.
[Amit Varma]: You know, we are not falling for a lot of fake news out there, unless it's on WhatsApp
[Amit Varma]: and it's about politics.
[Amit Varma]: But for a lot of these people, they don't even have that basic information.
[Amit Varma]: If they are told that you need a certificate and blah, blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: And they have no way of making sense, like these kids who, you know, you mentioned, we're
[Amit Varma]: trying to cycle to Orissa, like they didn't know, you know, how far away Orissa is to
[Amit Varma]: begin with.
[Amit Varma]: They know that it's virtually not doable, did you by any chance take anybody's number
[Amit Varma]: or something?
[Guest]: Yeah, I did.
[Guest]: We were in touch with a few people.
[Guest]: And we're going to now come up with a report as to what happened to their lives, when they
[Guest]: went back to their villages in the rural areas, and it turned out to be much worse than what
[Guest]: it is here.
[Guest]: Because at least here, there was some avenue of some employment and something, they had
[Guest]: something going for them in the villages, they had nothing going for them, especially
[Guest]: in places like Bihar.
[Guest]: We've been hearing a lot of feedback about the families over a period of time, tell people
[Guest]: as to why you come here, like, you know, you went there to feed us now how we expected
[Guest]: to feed you.
[Guest]: It's sad.
[Guest]: I mean, you're seeing a systematic breakdown of society.
[Guest]: But before we get into, you know, the poverty of information and all that, let's, let's
[Guest]: look at us, okay, average middle class people, we have our domestic workers come to us.
[Guest]: My last startup, by the way, was served, where we were working to make domestic workers financially
[Guest]: independent and debt free.
[Guest]: And maybe I'll speak about it later.
[Guest]: But I know of people living in the prosperous and the plus Jews and the Lokhandwala's and
[Guest]: the Bandra's and the Powai's of the world, who actually didn't pay their domestic worker.
[Guest]: Kis baat ka paisa aapko dena chahiye?
[Guest]: Oh, you've not come to work.
[Guest]: So you know, we don't, we don't have to pay you.
[Guest]: And obviously, you live in a slum, so you would have already contacted COVID.
[Guest]: And we basically live in our two bedroom hall kitchen flat.
[Guest]: So we are obviously safer than you.
[Guest]: So hey, you can't come here.
[Amit Varma]: And it's just sad.
[Amit Varma]: It's a poverty of empathy.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, on my society WhatsApp group, there was a lady complaining that why are you people
[Amit Varma]: paying your domestic help?
[Amit Varma]: My maid expects the same from me.
[Amit Varma]: And what do you even kind of say to that?
[Amit Varma]: The other absence besides the absence of information seems to me in some ways to be the absence
[Amit Varma]: of the state.
[Amit Varma]: Like, I've always held that in India, we don't really have a rule of law except for the rich,
[Amit Varma]: that the state exists, but the way people get by is through a kind of jugar that they
[Amit Varma]: figure out a way to get shit done.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems to me to a large extent, that's kind of what happened here that the state
[Amit Varma]: was just absent or clueless.
[Amit Varma]: And a civil society people like you guys stepping into the breach.
[Amit Varma]: What was the experience like though of dealing with the state?
[Amit Varma]: Like you've pointed out that there were people who were helpful, who cooperated with you
[Amit Varma]: guys wanted to work together with you guys.
[Amit Varma]: What was that experience like?
[Amit Varma]: Because the interface that the common person will often see is the officious policeman
[Amit Varma]: who is just rent seeking who's taking a bribe because you're not wearing your mask in your
[Amit Varma]: car.
[Guest]: What was your experience?
[Guest]: So I think it would be wrong to state that the state was completely bereft of political
[Guest]: will.
[Guest]: I think that's not the case.
[Guest]: People were really concerned.
[Guest]: But what had happened is over a period of time, with corruption, and the lack of reforms
[Guest]: had just robbed the state of its capacity.
[Guest]: So while you had like, Sangeeta Hasnale of the BMC is an amazing woman.
[Guest]: We've been working with her and I've seen her in action.
[Guest]: Jaiswal Saab is an amazing guy, who is again, solution oriented, focused, all of that.
[Guest]: But what happens when it comes to the lower staff?
[Guest]: There is a clear lack of capacity.
[Guest]: So A, do you have the will to do it?
[Guest]: Okay, if you have the will to do it, you don't have the capacity to do it.
[Guest]: And hence you're not being able to do it.
[Guest]: Fact of the matter is, at the end of the day, these people, the poor people are left high
[Guest]: and dry.
[Guest]: And that was the saddest lesson in all of this.
[Guest]: Like let's take even a ration card, which is functional.
[Guest]: People have a ration card, people know where to go to.
[Guest]: Let me give you a case in point.
[Guest]: We got a SOS distress call from Cassandra, who works with the Adivasi Pardas in R.A.
[Guest]: and Sanjay Gandhi National Park.
[Guest]: Now their ration shop is on the other side of the road of the Western Express Highway.
[Guest]: Now how are they supposed to come there?
[Guest]: And they're living in, you know, in someplace else.
[Guest]: Now I went with these people, and I went to the ration shop only for the ration guy to
[Guest]: tell me, first of all, why are you poking your nose in it?
[Guest]: And second is that, oh, we don't really have supplies.
[Guest]: So we've seen this in shop after shop, that you have people go to the shop and the guy
[Guest]: is just responding that, hey, we just have rice and even the rice is over.
[Guest]: So we don't have dal or we don't have anything else.
[Guest]: How do you really expect people to respond to this?
[Guest]: And yes, I would still hold the state accountable because I've seen what happened in Delhi.
[Guest]: I was extremely closely involved in how the entire food operation happened.
[Guest]: I spoke with my colleagues there and etc.
[Guest]: And you know, they gave people temporary ration cards.
[Guest]: The distribution point there was a school that anyone could go to a school and the principal
[Guest]: had been given powers, discretionary powers to, in case there's somebody without any documentation,
[Guest]: you do a panchnama and you give them the ration that they need.
[Guest]: We didn't see any of that here.
[Guest]: So yes, while there are good people in the system, as they are anywhere around, I think
[Guest]: this is a problem which is compounded many levels.
[Guest]: So I think you're correct in saying that what we see are the symptoms of this larger disease
[Guest]: of systemic failure.
[Guest]: So yeah, we see a police guy taking a bribe and, you know, it angers us and we see poverty
[Guest]: and all of that.
[Guest]: But yeah, I think what we now need to see, and this is why I come back to JP, you know,
[Guest]: his mantra which I use in my life is, just as Gandhiji had spoken to Jagjivan Ram and
[Guest]: spoken about Dharadranarayan, the most destitute, the most helpless person that you ever met.
[Guest]: If your decision is going to change his life for the better, your doubts will melt away.
[Guest]: And I think if I would use the same example in the 21st century in a slightly more varied
[Guest]: context is where JP comes in, where he says, I don't believe in a God, but I certainly
[Guest]: believe in a sin, which is unacceptable.
[Guest]: And that sin is twofold of avoidable suffering and of unutilized potential.
[Guest]: So that prism, that all of this, what you're seeing is actually avoidable suffering.
[Guest]: People don't need to go through this.
[Guest]: If the state would have been a little more vigilant, if people really walked the extra
[Guest]: mile, all of this could have been avoided.
[Guest]: And I think the sooner that people actually look at it as a core problem of governance,
[Guest]: rather than all this band-aid approach that we go about doing, it's not really going to
[Guest]: solve the problem.
[Guest]: Because what do NGOs do?
[Guest]: NGOs do something that the government has failed to do.
[Guest]: And I think I tell this to everybody that A, an NGO can never substitute the government.
[Guest]: B, no matter how many NGOs come together, you cannot ever substitute the government.
[Guest]: And C, if the government doesn't do something, that doesn't mean that I stop doing what I
[Guest]: do productively and start working with the government, which is not basically doing much.
[Guest]: So I do go and clean the beach whenever I have the time, but I'm not a huge proponent
[Guest]: of it.
[Guest]: Because I think the BMC has gotten contracts.
[Guest]: It is our citizens that should hold them accountable and they should basically go about fixing
[Guest]: the system.
[Guest]: And you know, as citizens, we again confuse action with activity.
[Guest]: And we are very happy with activity, which, okay, there's something going on and we put
[Guest]: something on Facebook and we get some gratification with a few hundred likes and we feel good
[Guest]: at the end of the day.
[Guest]: And I think that's good.
[Guest]: But unless and until we look at this as a problem of governance, which is why we are
[Guest]: now working on the hunger map, where we are actually trying to work on a set of interventions.
[Guest]: So we've actually identified about 10,000 of some of the most vulnerable populations
[Guest]: in Mumbai.
[Guest]: So each of them is called a micro cluster.
[Guest]: We've used Ashwin Mahesh's map unity tool, M group to actually map these clusters.
[Guest]: And of course, it's heartbreaking to go to them and essentially take their data and not
[Guest]: give something to them.
[Guest]: Parle has been kind enough where they supported us with biscuits.
[Guest]: Again, I think till date, we've distributed about 12 lakh odd biscuit packets, around
[Guest]: 12 lakh odd biscuit packets to people in need.
[Guest]: And we are now working with the BMC to say, okay, now this is a real problem.
[Guest]: Where are these night shelters, because the BMC has 28 night shelters, 18 of which are
[Guest]: functional.
[Guest]: It's I think, Mumbai's best kept secret.
[Guest]: Nobody knows about it.
[Guest]: And we're trying to map out these sections to these slum clusters.
[Guest]: We're trying to understand how the Rain Basera model worked in Delhi.
[Guest]: How do soup kitchens work in New York, where the problem is same.
[Guest]: It's not a uniquely, uniquely Mumbai problem.
[Guest]: And if there are funds which are allocated for this purpose, I think we can do a much
[Guest]: better job of it right now.
[Guest]: And our first focus now is on ensuring that these people actually get ration cards, so
[Guest]: that they can actually get some support from the state.
[Guest]: And because right now, they're not getting anything.
[Amit Varma]: So tell me a little bit about this hunger map, like, does it come out of the thinking
[Amit Varma]: that, okay, we've dealt with the immediate crisis, but we haven't obviously solved the
[Amit Varma]: problem of hunger, which is widespread.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: So tell me.
[Guest]: So Khana Chahiye was a relief operation.
[Guest]: So we understood the distress, and we're not people who would do this permanently.
[Guest]: We're not going to just cook food and just distribute that.
[Guest]: We'll do it as the circumstances demand out of us, because this was truly, you know, something
[Guest]: in the middle of the pandemic, where a large number of people are going hungry, and we
[Guest]: did what we did.
[Guest]: So we said that, okay, now that we have the data of these communities, for the last six
[Guest]: months, can we put all of this on a map?
[Guest]: And can we geographically say, okay, these people are here, we have their community contact
[Guest]: points, and we reach out to them.
[Guest]: And we now see what is the situation there?
[Guest]: Are they really that abject?
[Guest]: Can we take some data as to where did they come from?
[Guest]: What is the kind of work that they would do prior to bad days befell upon them?
[Guest]: So all of this, we were to put on a map.
[Guest]: So that's the first layer.
[Guest]: The second layer is then see what are the government schemes which are actually meant
[Guest]: for them?
[Guest]: And why is it that they don't reach them?
[Guest]: So the last mile delivery of all these public services, both at the BMC level, at the state
[Guest]: government level, I'm sure at the central government level, you have a Atal Bihari Vajpayee
[Guest]: this, you have a Deendayal Upadhyay that.
[Guest]: So can we at least ensure in a controlled manner, that this lot basically gets whatever
[Guest]: the state has at least in principle set out to do, so that they're a better lot over a
[Guest]: period of time, you know, there is something called the National Urban Livelihood Mission,
[Guest]: which is again, something very interesting, where they're supposed to train a lot of people
[Guest]: and skill them, so on and so forth.
[Guest]: But again, it's just lying in disarray, nobody really pays too much attention on that.
[Guest]: So we've identified a few of these schemes.
[Guest]: And now for the better part of next year is to focus on these communities to actually
[Guest]: ensure that they get all the possible state help that at least the state at least in principle
[Guest]: has promised to provide them.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me about the role that corporates have played in this, like you pointed out, Parle
[Amit Varma]: gave all these lakhs of biscuits and all of that, you've spoken about Wipro stepping in,
[Amit Varma]: tell me a bit about that, like, did they come on their own?
[Amit Varma]: Did you approach them?
[Guest]: What was all?
[Guest]: So I'm part of Jagriti Yatra, which is the largest train led enterprise journey of its
[Guest]: kind, which takes 500 young people across the country.
[Guest]: And the idea is to inspire them to become entrepreneurs.
[Guest]: And because of that network, I had somebody working in Wipro.
[Guest]: And you know, they reached out to me saying, Listen, you're doing some good work.
[Guest]: Do you need some help?
[Guest]: How can we help you?
[Guest]: And we actually gave a proposal to them and they were kind enough to support us.
[Guest]: And Wipro was one of our biggest supports.
[Guest]: I must say that the turnaround time between when they approached us when we gave them
[Guest]: a proposal, and when they approved of it was less than 24 hours.
[Guest]: And because I think they came from a place with a lot of heart, and they of course did
[Guest]: their inquiries and they would obviously see that the money that they're giving us is well
[Guest]: spent and judiciously used.
[Guest]: But yeah, I think they threw their weight behind us.
[Guest]: And I think thanks to Wipro, a lot of the other corporates came on board.
[Guest]: So we had Paytm, which contributed something, we had Godrej, which contributed something,
[Guest]: we had Redington, which contributed something.
[Guest]: And all these companies essentially happened because Wipro basically came on board.
[Guest]: So that was a big validation of sorts.
[Guest]: And then I think what happened was a large number of our volunteers were with corporates.
[Guest]: So they would get us in touch with their CSR team saying, hey, you know, I'm volunteering.
[Guest]: Can we do something?
[Guest]: I remember the vice president of Tata Trust was a volunteer.
[Guest]: I didn't even know this until later on I was told about it.
[Guest]: So I think a lot of the good word spread, good news spread with word of mouth.
[Guest]: And that really got a lot of people to support us.
[Guest]: But while that is where we got the large donation sums, also a large number of people who donated
[Guest]: were basically simple millennials.
[Guest]: It's very interesting to see a majority of the people who donated to us are millennials.
[Guest]: Not the 40 plus generation, which we would have expected because they have a larger pile
[Guest]: of savings would basically do more charity, no.
[Guest]: I think our millennials have much more heart than I think the previous generations put
[Guest]: together.
[Guest]: I've nearly given up on that generation.
[Guest]: And yeah, I think that's how we were able to do a good job of it.
[Guest]: But interestingly, there is again, Anik Gadia is our residential Marwadi.
[Guest]: And as with in all of our previous projects, he was in charge of the finances and the accounting,
[Guest]: which again was done very nicely because if you need your sponsors coming back.
[Guest]: So Disney All-Star supported us again in a big way.
[Guest]: If you want your sponsors coming back to you, you need to give them reports, you need to
[Guest]: make sure that this is run as a professional organization, that this operation is as world
[Guest]: class as it gets.
[Guest]: And that's when I think the focus was on the team.
[Guest]: Because I think the learning for me in all of this is whatever you do, it has to be collaborative.
[Guest]: Like I think early on, we said forget about the branding.
[Guest]: I mean, who's going to go about branding something in the middle of a pandemic?
[Guest]: Forget it.
[Guest]: If there are people on the ground, let them call it whatever they want to let them donate
[Guest]: it, as long as it's reaching people, that's fine with us.
[Guest]: So yeah, so that's that.
[Amit Varma]: And you also mentioned that there were corporates who, you know, you went to for the CSR funds
[Amit Varma]: and they said, no, we have to give it somewhere else.
[Guest]: Yeah, I think the PM Cares fund is the closest that any of us humans can experience when
[Guest]: it comes to an astronomical black hole.
[Guest]: Everything just go there and just disappear.
[Guest]: Because corporate after corporate would tell us that, oh, we've already given it to PM
[Guest]: Cares and we've already given it to PM Cares.
[Guest]: And I saw the entire NGO ecosystem collapse.
[Guest]: So many community kitchens, which were started by just some do-gooders in their localities,
[Guest]: didn't really have the wherewithal to actually keep the operations going.
[Guest]: And I think when all of this started becoming apparent after the initial bit of support
[Guest]: started evaporating, because see, the pandemic also got extended.
[Guest]: I mean, the lockdown was extended month after month, we would see the Prime Minister extend
[Guest]: the lockdown, and then the government would extend the lockdown basis, the announcement
[Guest]: that they would hear from the center.
[Guest]: So because of all of that, that had also led to a lot of donor fatigue.
[Guest]: So on one side, we told that all of this money is going to PM Care, we don't know how is
[Guest]: it used.
[Guest]: And I think it's not even under the RTI.
[Guest]: So it's as opaque as it can get.
[Guest]: So a complete lack of transparency.
[Guest]: And on the other side, you have donor fatigue, because while people have contributed, people
[Guest]: feel that, okay, we've done whatever we could.
[Guest]: And now basically, the problem should somehow take care of itself.
[Guest]: No matter how illogical that is or sounds, that was the excuse that a large number of
[Guest]: people gave us.
[Guest]: So yeah, that's actually the sad part.
[Amit Varma]: Let's get a little meta now, right?
[Amit Varma]: So you know, we've discussed that the system is broken, here's a crisis.
[Amit Varma]: Here's an ongoing crisis.
[Amit Varma]: But that's a different matter.
[Amit Varma]: Here's an immediate crisis, you're going out and feeding all these people, there are well
[Amit Varma]: meaning people within the system, but the system itself is broken.
[Amit Varma]: When I try to get a little meta and think about the fundamental flaws that it reveals,
[Amit Varma]: and I'll ask you for more of them.
[Amit Varma]: But the first one which stands out to me and tell me if you agree, is that government isn't
[Amit Varma]: local enough.
[Amit Varma]: If it was much more local, there would be much more accountability, you would have better
[Amit Varma]: information going through to people in the state, they'd be able to utilize whatever
[Amit Varma]: little capacity they have better and everything would kind of work.
[Amit Varma]: And that seems to me to be a systemic flaw, which would solve so many things, not just
[Amit Varma]: this and yet, yet it's kind of impossible because the only people who can now make it
[Amit Varma]: happen in the existing system are the people who are, you know, enjoying that accumulated
[Amit Varma]: power at the center, whether a center or state or whatever, why make it more local?
[Guest]: What's what's your?
[Guest]: I think the 74th amendment, which is about urban decentralization of power has been in
[Guest]: abeyance for the longest period of time.
[Guest]: I mean, let's look at Mumbai, for example, we have what is called award committees, which
[Guest]: was supposed to be the corporate awards.
[Guest]: So in Mumbai, there are two kinds of awards, they are the corporate awards, which are numbered.
[Guest]: So you have 1 to 227, 1 being in Dahisar and 227 being in Colaba.
[Guest]: And then you have these A to T, which are your administrative awards, which are basically
[Guest]: one or more corporate awards put together.
[Guest]: Now, the idea behind the award committee was, you were supposed to get more people to participate.
[Guest]: But while they claim to be implementing the 74th amendment, they said, okay, the award
[Guest]: committee is now comprised of all these corporators and maybe some members of some NGOs and so
[Guest]: on and so forth, and the police and etc, etc.
[Guest]: So, that is a complete repudiation of what the community participation law actually was.
[Guest]: Now, let's again, come back to 2005.
[Guest]: 2005 was when the Nagar Raj Bill under the Jawaharlal Nehru Urban Renewal Mission was
[Guest]: presented as the model community participation law.
[Guest]: And you know, the JNNURM funds were like a carrot dangled to them saying, oh, you know,
[Guest]: if you pass the community participation law, we'll basically give you these funds and so
[Guest]: on and so forth.
[Guest]: Maharashtra passed a ridiculous watered down version of the act, which is which still has
[Guest]: not implemented.
[Guest]: I mean, they've passed it, but they have not notified it.
[Guest]: I mean, that's the level of treachery, sadly, by our politicians.
[Guest]: But that apart, I think the problem is that in a city like Mumbai, your average ward has
[Guest]: about 40 to 50,000 voters, right?
[Guest]: You add another 20,000 people who are below the age of 18.
[Guest]: So that's your population in the area.
[Guest]: How do you expect one person to liaise with these people and solve their problems?
[Guest]: All of them just operate out of one small encroached footpath, which is turned into
[Guest]: some sort of a political office and they just put two benches and they're somehow supposed
[Guest]: to solve problems.
[Guest]: So there is no grassroots democracy.
[Guest]: I think at one level, when we speak about ourselves being a democracy, we think about
[Guest]: elections.
[Guest]: But again, if you see voter participation, you have more people voting at the Lok Sabha
[Guest]: level because they know that a prime minister gets elected and it's a bada election.
[Guest]: You have a lot of people voting at the Vidhan Sabha level and you know, the chief minister
[Guest]: gets elected and it's a bada election.
[Guest]: But when it comes to municipal elections, it's seen as a chota election, oh, it's a
[Guest]: councillor and etc, etc.
[Guest]: What is it possibly going to do to us?
[Guest]: But if you actually look at the things that actually matter, the roads that we walk on,
[Guest]: our footpaths, primary health care, primary education, garbage, water, sanitation, sewage,
[Guest]: all of this is BMC.
[Guest]: So I mean, it is really far-fetched for a person to, you know, participate in elections
[Guest]: and then not really have a say in the things that actually matter right in his or her immediate
[Guest]: vicinity.
[Guest]: And that is exactly what the Nagaraj Bill was supposed to remedy.
[Guest]: It spoke about area sabhas, which are like mohalla sabhas.
[Guest]: So you have one or two contiguous polling booths, one locality, which had an area sabha
[Guest]: and they would elect an area sabha representative.
[Guest]: And so if there are 35 polling booths, you would have 35 area sabha representatives who
[Guest]: would be mini-corporators, so to say.
[Guest]: They would have a ward committee, the corporator would be answerable to the ward committee,
[Guest]: the ward committee would set the agenda.
[Guest]: Right now, just think about it.
[Guest]: How do your corporators go about proposing works?
[Guest]: There is absolutely no study, nothing.
[Guest]: The contractors come with a list of things and they tell you that, okay, this is what
[Guest]: we did last year.
[Guest]: This is what we'll do this year.
[Guest]: This is what we'll continue.
[Guest]: That's it.
[Guest]: So there is absolutely no involvement when it comes to the electorate, when it comes
[Guest]: to understanding what the issues are, when it comes to correcting something gone wrong.
[Guest]: Like let's take the Brimstowad project, right, which came after the 26-7 Mumbai deluge is
[Guest]: still not implemented.
[Guest]: Look at the kind of money that is being spent by the BMC.
[Guest]: Let's take our roads.
[Guest]: It's almost in Mumbai, if you divide the budget by, there are approximately 2000 kilometers
[Guest]: of road.
[Guest]: So it works out to 50 lakh rupees per kilometer, right?
[Guest]: That is the kind of money that is going there.
[Guest]: The entire process somehow leaves the citizenry out of the decision making.
[Guest]: And I think, yeah, this is all the result of that.
[Guest]: Because had you had these functional urban panchayats, mahalda sabhaas, as I would call
[Guest]: it, then all of this would be weeded out.
[Guest]: Because meeting after meeting, if you're going to have a public meeting, we are going to
[Guest]: discuss these problems.
[Guest]: If there is a problem with the BMC, if there's a problem with the ration shop, if there's
[Guest]: a problem with the police, if there's a problem with the traffic police, all of this would
[Guest]: have got weeded out.
[Guest]: If by nothing else, then by at least benign collective informed assertion.
[Guest]: Because all said and done, no matter what the systemic problems that we have, I think
[Guest]: if you are at it over a period of time, and you have evidence, then things do change.
[Guest]: But we don't even have that.
[Guest]: So yeah, so to answer your question, I think our urban governance is a big disaster in
[Guest]: all our Indian cities.
[Guest]: And I think that will require another podcast by itself, because Mumbai is an absolute mess.
[Guest]: So while we elect our councillors, and the councillors elect a mayor, the mayor and the
[Guest]: councillors can make laws, but they can't implement laws.
[Guest]: The implementation is with the Municipal Commissioner who is directly answerable to the Chief Minister.
[Guest]: And it's a mess.
[Guest]: So if this is not enough, you have, so let's just take where we are right now, Khar, okay,
[Guest]: let's go to the highway.
[Guest]: On the Western Express Highway, the Western Express Highway is managed by the MMRDA.
[Guest]: You then go to that Kherwadi flyover, which will be managed by the PWD, because it's a
[Guest]: flyover at the end of the day.
[Guest]: Then you go a little further, that bridge is managed by the MSRDC.
[Guest]: Then you reach Worli Sea Link, and that's managed by another organization.
[Guest]: So can you see that just within a small set of just a few kilometers, you have like, five
[Amit Varma]: different organizations.
[Guest]: And they'll operate in silos, they'll have their own incentives.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, railways, why should you have, okay, now it's Piyush Goyal, who coincidentally
[Guest]: lives in South Bombay.
[Guest]: But I mean, just think about it.
[Guest]: You have somebody else elected from somewhere else, whose only idea about emancipation is
[Guest]: to go ahead and set up a coach factory.
[Guest]: I mean, can you imagine, why is a coach factory in Raiba really?
[Guest]: Because the great leader who gets elected there couldn't do anything to solve local
[Guest]: people's problems.
[Guest]: So you basically get the railway minister to basically put something there and that's
[Guest]: supposed to solve problems.
[Guest]: But coming back to the point, how would you have such indirect accountability?
[Guest]: For somebody in the country looking at railways in Mumbai, it just doesn't make sense.
[Guest]: Why do you have a shipping minister suddenly look at our portlands, our port trust?
[Guest]: You have the shipping ministry in what?
[Guest]: We don't have, I think one of the only large cities in the world which doesn't have an
[Guest]: integrated transport system.
[Guest]: And you have so many parastatal agencies, and you have the MMRDA, and then you have
[Guest]: the collector, and then you have the state government, and then you have the BMC, and
[Guest]: then you have MHADA.
[Guest]: And if you actually put all these jurisdictions over a map, you know, none of them will actually
[Guest]: overlap.
[Guest]: You know, none of their borders will actually overlap.
[Guest]: It's just, it's just such a, such a big mess.
[Amit Varma]: Sorry.
[Guest]: No, that's, that's, that's, that's, that's the image of urban governance as citizens
[Guest]: see it.
[Amit Varma]: No, no, that's very eloquent and also very scary.
[Amit Varma]: And we will not leave that discussion for a separate podcast.
[Amit Varma]: This is a long podcast.
[Amit Varma]: It contains multitudes and we'll talk more about it in the second half.
[Amit Varma]: But for the moment, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Have you always wanted to be a writer, but never quite gotten down to it?
[Amit Varma]: Well, I'd love to help you.
[Amit Varma]: One of the great joys of the last few months for me was discovering how much I enjoy teaching
[Amit Varma]: what I've learned over the years.
[Amit Varma]: And my online course, The Art of Clear Writing is now open for registration.
[Amit Varma]: In this course, through four webinars spread over four weekends, I share all I know about
[Amit Varma]: the craft and practice of clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: There are many exercises, much interaction.
[Amit Varma]: And over the nine months that I've taught this course, a lively writing community has
[Amit Varma]: formed itself.
[Amit Varma]: The course costs rupees 10,000 plus GST or about $150.
[Amit Varma]: And the February classes begin on Feb six.
[Amit Varma]: So if you're interested, head on over to register at indiancut.com slash clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: Being a good writer doesn't require God given talent, just a willingness to work hard and
[Amit Varma]: a clear idea of what you need to do to refine your skills.
[Amit Varma]: I can help you indiancut.com slash clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Ruben Mascarenas, a man who wears many hats, but fundamentally someone
[Amit Varma]: who is deeply involved in making our world a better place.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, we've spoken about Khana Chahiye, which I wanted to spend the first half of
[Amit Varma]: the show doing because it's so kind of urgent to our times and so eye opening in many ways.
[Amit Varma]: And I normally start on my episodes by talking about the personal journeys of whoever I'm
[Amit Varma]: talking to.
[Amit Varma]: And your personal journey is also pretty fascinating, because I think the default mode for a citizen
[Amit Varma]: in India is one of apathy.
[Amit Varma]: You know that I can't change anything, let me just, you know, make a good life for myself
[Amit Varma]: and blah, blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: And that's kind of the default mode of citizenship, we are apathetic.
[Amit Varma]: And also, as Public Choice Service would tell you, there is something called the free rider
[Amit Varma]: effect, there might be some social good that we would like, but we will let others fight
[Unknown]: for it.
[Amit Varma]: Why should we do the hard work?
[Amit Varma]: You are the complete converse of all of this in the sense that you dive into causes that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, there was this urban governance activist from Bangalore, V. Ravi Chandra,
[Amit Varma]: who once described himself as a patron saint of lost causes.
[Amit Varma]: And I think a lot of these causes that, to my cynical mind from a distance where we have
[Amit Varma]: such a overwhelming dysfunctional state, seem to be, you know, if not lost causes, very
[Amit Varma]: difficult causes, which, you know, there's no sort of immediate fruit at the end of the
[Amit Varma]: line.
[Amit Varma]: But I'm rambling.
[Amit Varma]: So let's talk about your journey.
[Amit Varma]: What made you interested in politics and social work to begin with?
[Guest]: I think two, three things.
[Guest]: I think I come from an orthodox Catholic family, charity came to us naturally, you know, we
[Guest]: would go to the church and we would do some social work.
[Guest]: And you know, I would always ask this question as to, okay, how much are we going to do?
[Guest]: Because it's just a drop in the ocean.
[Guest]: So while I still did it, I would always have this question in mind.
[Guest]: And then I went to St. Xavier's and I think that just opened up a lot of, I mean, that
[Guest]: was really grounding because that was an eye opener to a larger world around our immediate
[Guest]: surroundings that we would know.
[Guest]: And that, which was, it really took me out of my comfort zone and challenged me.
[Guest]: And then of course, engineering happened.
[Guest]: I studied at St. Francis and while growing up, I remember something very interesting
[Guest]: had happened.
[Guest]: There was a banker who had contested a local corporator election, and I had thought that
[Guest]: she would win, you know, and I was interested in politics very early on.
[Guest]: The earliest memory that my mother has of me about the television is me watching Lok
[Guest]: Sabha.
[Guest]: But that apart, I was, you know, because I would play and I would know these local boys,
[Guest]: because they would live in the locality.
[Guest]: And some of them were affiliated to a political party.
[Guest]: And, you know, when the elections came, I thought the banker would win because she was
[Guest]: an independent candidate and she was well educated and had the right resources.
[Guest]: But when the results came, these guys won.
[Guest]: And so I was really surprised as to how does this happen?
[Guest]: Like, you know, we expect the best talent and the best resourced person to actually
[Guest]: end up winning.
[Guest]: So, you know, I would go to them and I would tell them that, listen, I want to hang out
[Guest]: with you.
[Guest]: But I don't want to join you.
[Guest]: So, you know, they said that, listen, we need somebody to write letters in English.
[Guest]: So I would go to their shakha, quote unquote, and I would write letters in English, but
[Guest]: I would get to see, you know, how the entire system really operates.
[Guest]: How do they go about organizing themselves for elections, so on and so forth.
[Guest]: So all this was happening.
[Guest]: And the RTI movement had just kicked in.
[Guest]: Maharashtra had an RTI Act in 2003, which then became the National RTI Act in 2005.
[Guest]: And we had sort of filed RTI queries.
[Guest]: I still remember my first query was about shifting a garbage dump, which wasn't there
[Guest]: when we were growing up.
[Guest]: And then suddenly the garbage dump really became the entrance to the Irla Road, so to
[Guest]: say.
[Guest]: And I remember after writing letters of complaint that we actually put some of the formal letters
[Guest]: that we learned in school and college to use.
[Guest]: And nothing really happened.
[Guest]: And when I filed an RTI, I realized that that wasn't there.
[Guest]: That was outside the MLA's house.
[Guest]: The MLA didn't want the so-called gandhagi.
[Guest]: So he got us shifted to the Irla market.
[Guest]: And you know, we had a signature campaign and etc.
[Guest]: And we actually ended up shifting the garbage dump to where it was supposed to be and not
[Guest]: in a crowded area and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: So that was my first win of sorts.
[Guest]: And this was again, early days, I didn't know, activist or activism or anything of that sort.
[Unknown]: How old were you?
[Guest]: 16, I think.
[Guest]: And then I remember, I joined engineering college.
[Guest]: It used to be very hectic because college would be between eight and five.
[Guest]: So I would come home really tired.
[Guest]: I was not used to working that long.
[Guest]: And I remember one day I was asleep and I heard some people screaming and I called my
[Guest]: watchman to ask them what the hell are these people doing and why are they yelling at me.
[Guest]: So I went down and I ended up meeting a few activists who are prominent names today.
[Guest]: And they said that we are trying to win an election.
[Guest]: And we are trying to change the way politics is and we're going to only spend 75,000 rupees
[Guest]: on winning this election.
[Guest]: So I told them, you're clearly out of your mind.
[Guest]: And I happen to know something about this.
[Guest]: And what you're saying is, is impossible.
[Guest]: And that was the beginning of the Vote Mumbai Vote Juhu campaign, where 49 NGOs came together
[Guest]: and put up what is called a citizens consensus candidate and Adolf D'Souza.
[Guest]: And I remember I went there and I, I was really excited because I always was interested in
[Guest]: politics.
[Guest]: These seem to be decent people.
[Guest]: That was the only reason why I didn't join the previous cohort.
[Guest]: So I said, okay, let's, let's do something.
[Guest]: So I went there and they said, okay, the elections are about four months from now.
[Guest]: And we're already doing some prachar and you should do some prachar in your local area.
[Guest]: So I said, okay.
[Guest]: So I went to Prem Nagar, the slum right next door, and, you know, we had helped these people.
[Guest]: The deluge was recent.
[Guest]: We had, you know, again, given them food and all that.
[Guest]: And these were all boys that I played football with.
[Guest]: So I remember it was in the middle of the election.
[Guest]: I went to the slum and the slum looked like a war ravaged zone.
[Guest]: I couldn't see any able bodied young man or woman.
[Guest]: I could only see the extremely old or the extremely young, the toddlers.
[Guest]: So I asked people, where are these people, where are these people gone?
[Guest]: I just said, no, they've gone for, they're actually on hire.
[Guest]: So the term that they use was they're basically paid political volunteers and they're gone
[Guest]: for prachar.
[Guest]: This is season time for them.
[Guest]: I mean, you're, you're essentially come at the wrong time.
[Guest]: So I went there and, you know, I gathered all these guys and I said, hey, you know what,
[Guest]: this is what we're doing.
[Guest]: And we have a candidate and it's about clean politics.
[Guest]: And, you know, if we, we've actually voted for everyone, our lives won't change.
[Guest]: This is the guy and you should vote for me.
[Guest]: So they all laughed at me and they said, I think you're out of your head, you know, I
[Guest]: mean, you're a friend and you're a great guy, but you shouldn't get into this.
[Guest]: It doesn't work that way.
[Guest]: So I said, no, no, no, no, no, no, I, please do this for me.
[Guest]: So I encouraged them to call for a sabha and they said, okay, you come, we normally charge
[Guest]: people, but we'll gather people for you.
[Guest]: And I remember I climbed onto a taxi and gave a very rousing speech and there were good
[Guest]: two, 300 people there and everybody was clapping, clapping.
[Guest]: And now I asked them to vote for me and et cetera.
[Guest]: And you know, they, after the whole thing, they, they again asked me, okay, so now what,
[Guest]: are you still as crazy as you were?
[Guest]: I said, no, I'm, I'm crazy and I want your help to go door to door and et cetera.
[Guest]: And he said, but what are we, I mean, okay, now this, all this was, okay, you were a friend,
[Guest]: so we let this happen, but what are you going to give us?
[Guest]: So I said, what do you, I am not that rich guy.
[Guest]: Okay, yeah, I live in the building there, but that's about it.
[Guest]: And they showed me three pipes.
[Guest]: One was a shining stainless steel pipe, one was slightly aluminum-ish.
[Guest]: And they said, the first pipe is being given by party X, the second pipe is being given
[Guest]: by party Y and they're building this toilet block for us and they're doing this and they
[Guest]: have promised us this and that, what are you giving?
[Guest]: And I said, do you think that these people will basically, basically do something?
[Guest]: And they said, no, no, but this is how it is and you have to pay us if you basically
[Guest]: want our services.
[Guest]: So I said, okay, I don't want your services, but let me campaign.
[Guest]: And you do what you have to do, but you at least vote for me.
[Guest]: So we did that.
[Guest]: And I still remember on the day of the elections, we actually ended up winning that seat.
[Guest]: So we won by 4,582 votes and we, I never expected that we would win, but we did.
[Guest]: And I still remember that night I was home.
[Guest]: I was truly ecstatic, I remember partying and I remember my father came up and woke
[Guest]: me up, startled.
[Guest]: And he said, what happened?
[Guest]: And I said, what happened?
[Guest]: Why are you waking me up?
[Guest]: I was, I mean, I'm asleep.
[Guest]: So he's like, there are another, there are about 30, 40 people outside of our door.
[Guest]: And I go there and I see these boys and et cetera, and I said, what happened?
[Guest]: And they said, no, we voted for you.
[Guest]: The results came as per the polling booth.
[Guest]: They realized that we've not voted for you, now they've cut our water.
[Guest]: And I went there.
[Guest]: So I saw something, I saw that, of course, we worked the whole thing out.
[Guest]: We got the BMC to repair the water and all that, and they got that water connection.
[Guest]: But that for me was the moment of truth.
[Guest]: Because if you had to really change the world for the better, in the most effective way,
[Guest]: you had to engage with the state.
[Guest]: You couldn't have worked in silos, you couldn't have done it without the state.
[Guest]: And then, thanks to Adolf, who basically became the corporator, and he was a member of the
[Guest]: Prabhakar Samiti, the ward committee I was talking to you earlier about, he was part
[Guest]: of the standing committee.
[Guest]: I was his head of staff in many ways, I would draft his letters, and that really gave me
[Guest]: a bird's eye view of things.
[Guest]: And I again remember six months into his tenure, Shailesh Gandhi, who, this was before he became
[Guest]: the Central Information Commissioner and so on and so forth, he was an RTI activist.
[Guest]: And I remember, he had written to all of us over email, saying that there's a Crawford
[Guest]: market redevelopment, and the redevelopment is supposed to get us X, but it is being given
[Guest]: for Y, which is much less than X.
[Guest]: So it's clearly there's something amiss.
[Guest]: And khule aam chori ho rahi hai, so to say.
[Guest]: And we had to stop it.
[Guest]: So I remember, I volunteered, and me and a few friends actually went to all these 227
[Guest]: Congress, and I remember, till then, we had this theory of the good Congress, of the bad
[Guest]: Congress, of the good BJP, and the bad BJP.
[Guest]: And depending upon convenience, you know, you would say that, okay, some leaders are
[Guest]: the good Congress, and some, some leaders, the bad Congress and bad party and good party
[Guest]: or whatever.
[Guest]: But I remember, all of them, on the face of it said, yeah, this is wrong, and something
[Guest]: needs to be done.
[Guest]: I remember when the issue came up for discussion, I was in the viewers gallery, by the way,
[Guest]: the BMC has a viewers gallery, which is not being used right now.
[Guest]: But you should go there someday.
[Guest]: It's a good view.
[Guest]: And I remember we were all escorts there, we were looking at what's happening, and the
[Guest]: proceedings were going on in Marathi, and this issue suddenly comes up.
[Guest]: And not one person stood up to oppose it.
[Guest]: The only person who stood up was that Adolphe de Souza, who stood up and he said that this
[Guest]: is wrong.
[Guest]: And I object to it.
[Guest]: And because he objected to it, it was recorded and there was some probe and the whole thing
[Guest]: got scuttled.
[Guest]: And yeah, the thing didn't take take place at the end of the day.
[Guest]: But that day, I was convinced that boss, it has to be politics.
[Guest]: And it has to be long term.
[Guest]: And this was around the same time that I was introduced to Jayaprakash Narayan.
[Guest]: And then the entire idea of looking at systemic problems and political reform as the as the
[Guest]: core issue.
[Guest]: Because Jayaprakash is this phenomenal figure, I still call him my mentor.
[Guest]: I joined Lok Satta.
[Guest]: I left Lok Satta when he decided to support Modi, but that's a, that's a discussion for
[Guest]: another day.
[Guest]: But yeah, so Lok Satta was the first party that I joined before Aam Aadmi Party.
[Guest]: So that happened.
[Guest]: And I think I thought that this is a great party, here is a great thinker.
[Guest]: And we already had one ward in Juhu.
[Guest]: So we were like the beacon of sorts when it came to the so called clean politics.
[Guest]: But I saw that while we were doing some good things, we were still a flash in the pan.
[Guest]: And we weren't really being able to create impact at scale.
[Guest]: And that's when the Anna Hazare India Against Corruption movement happened.
[Guest]: And I was one of the few people who I remember, and Arvind Kejriwal, who I didn't know, then
[Guest]: reached out to and say and said that, look, we're trying to do something against corruption.
[Guest]: And why don't you join us in Mumbai?
[Guest]: And yeah, we organized Mumbai and we saw that widespread massive support, which again turned
[Guest]: into the Aam Aadmi Party and you know, I've been, I've been there since and also, the
[Guest]: Aam Aadmi Party actually gave me such an amazing opportunity at my age to end up becoming spokesperson.
[Guest]: I am the National Joint Secretary there.
[Guest]: I'm able to work very closely with the Delhi government on a few of its programs.
[Guest]: I'm able to influence policy.
[Guest]: I'm able to formulate the party stance.
[Guest]: So yeah, so that's basically been my energy in the political space.
[Guest]: And yeah, I think ever since that day in the BMC, there was there was really no looking
[Amit Varma]: back.
[Amit Varma]: So let's take a step back.
[Amit Varma]: Like, I do want to ask you lots of questions about your sort of intellectual evolution
[Amit Varma]: at this time through people like JP and all of that and how your understanding of politics
[Amit Varma]: deepened.
[Amit Varma]: But before that, I'm very fascinated by the BMC elections for which, you know, you were
[Amit Varma]: Chief of Staff, as you say, for Adolf D'Souza, you got 4,700 votes or something in 2006,
[Amit Varma]: I think.
[Amit Varma]: 2007.
[Amit Varma]: And seven and you guys won.
[Amit Varma]: So here's my question.
[Amit Varma]: Help me understand the mechanics of this, that when there is a local election like this
[Amit Varma]: at the BMC level, number one, the people who are voting, why are they voting the way they
[Amit Varma]: are?
[Amit Varma]: And number two, the people who are standing for these elections, why are they standing?
[Guest]: So in most cases, while the corporators may argue that they can only make laws, but they
[Guest]: can't implement them.
[Guest]: So while they may be true on paper, the fact of the matter is, if a corporator wants to
[Guest]: do something, he can get something done, irrespective of whether he has powers on paper or not.
[Guest]: We have seen that on multiple locations.
[Guest]: That's point one.
[Guest]: Point two, the way people vote is that they're really disinterested in the BMC election.
[Guest]: You know, it's seen as, okay, it's just the least important election.
[Guest]: The councillor is seen extremely low in the hierarchy of elected representatives.
[Guest]: And, you know, people don't think highly of them consequentially, and hence that disinterest.
[Guest]: The third, the people who contest typically are, again, from established parties, because
[Guest]: what happens is you have to give your carder an opportunity to contest.
[Guest]: You have a lot of competition when it comes to MLAs and MPs, because those are bigger
[Guest]: elections, you need more funds.
[Guest]: But a councillor election is a small election.
[Guest]: And if you are not going to accommodate your party carder in the councillor election, then
[Guest]: where are you going to basically accommodate them?
[Guest]: So most of these people are people who want to make a career out of politics.
[Guest]: If you typically see most of the Shiv Sana MLAs today, that evolution started by them
[Guest]: being corporators at some point in time.
[Guest]: And then they became successful after going to their villages, starting the party there,
[Guest]: and then expanding the party's footprint, so on and so forth.
[Guest]: So these are people who want to contest, but again, in typical parties, if you have a corporator
[Guest]: who becomes an MLA, then he will ensure that there is no corporator winning twice, because
[Guest]: then he suddenly gets threatened because of it.
[Guest]: So because of this churn, and because of the manner in which reservations play out, for
[Guest]: example, you have 50% of all local body seats reserved for women, which is a good thing.
[Guest]: You have 27% reserved for OBC, you have 18% reserved for SCST, so on.
[Guest]: Now, the problem is that because these reservations come only six months prior to elections, okay,
[Guest]: it's a good thing that you have diverse groups of people participating in it, but the open
[Guest]: so called constituencies become so called competitive because all the menfolk who get
[Guest]: displaced from their constituencies basically come there and that's why you have so much
[Guest]: of a khichdi.
[Guest]: So if you typically see most parties actually struggle to get candidates of the particular
[Guest]: combination that the reservation is there for, and that speaks volumes about the political
[Guest]: discourse itself in terms of participation of people in these parties.
[Guest]: So yeah, so that's broadly how the entire election goes, it's a khichdi.
[Guest]: But this time around, we expect that there will be more clarity much earlier on so that
[Guest]: you can have a long protracted campaign towards elections.
[Guest]: Because also see, prior to this, if you see the citizens movement, right, they were independents.
[Guest]: So you had to go to people, tell them who you are, what do you do?
[Guest]: What do you stand for?
[Guest]: And if you get elected, what would you do for them?
[Guest]: So the what's in it for me part.
[Guest]: Now, all of this had to be done just within 15 days, or 21 days at max from the time that
[Guest]: you got allotted a symbol, which would be the random, should be anything random.
[Guest]: So politics is about consistency, it is about perseverance, it's about that repeated attempt
[Guest]: to communicate.
[Guest]: And all said and done, 10 years ago, we were still somebody who was just an independent
[Guest]: looking at one particular locality.
[Guest]: Now all said and done, we have a political party, during Lok Satta, yeah, we had a political
[Guest]: party, which had a reserved symbol, which nobody know about, it was a good party.
[Guest]: But now we have the Aam Aadmi Party.
[Guest]: All said and done, we have a model in place in Delhi, you may argue whichever way, but
[Guest]: the fact of the matter is that it has actually worked.
[Guest]: And there is the broom, which is our symbol, there is Arvind Kejriwal, who's our leader,
[Guest]: and all of those things put together.
[Guest]: Now, I believe that these forces of new politics have never been better positioned than they
[Guest]: are now.
[Guest]: So hoping for a much better election, because I think also what has happened in the pandemic
[Guest]: is people for the first time have been forced to think about, is our healthcare really that
[Guest]: bad that all of us have to just be cooped up in our houses?
[Guest]: Why is it that the government apparatus has collapsed and how?
[Guest]: Why are these people on the streets?
[Guest]: Why do these people have to go out there and go back to their villages?
[Guest]: All of these things have really, I believe, have forced people across the board to ask
[Guest]: some serious questions about their government and things like that.
[Guest]: And I think this BMC elections would be a very, very, very interesting election, assuming
[Guest]: it goes the way we hope it to.
[Amit Varma]: I'm wondering if there is, you know, before we come back to larger questions, I'm wondering
[Amit Varma]: if there's a little bit of the availability heuristic here, because the people who interact,
[Amit Varma]: you interact with, would obviously care more about all of this and, you know, would be
[Amit Varma]: more aware and even people who are not activists like you would want to come across that way.
[Amit Varma]: But my general sense, just sort of looking around, is that people have gone back to being
[Amit Varma]: apathetic, because everything that changed, you know, we've got a new normal now, and
[Amit Varma]: people are going on with their lives.
[Amit Varma]: And so I'm not sure that that, like, for me, the fundamental insight, which I would like
[Amit Varma]: all Indians to have is that our state is a dysfunctional and parasitic state, and that
[Amit Varma]: we have been treated as subjects, not as citizens.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't, and this is another opportunity where you'd imagine that more of us would
[Amit Varma]: see that.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't think enough of us see that.
[Amit Varma]: I think we're just back into the normal kind of groove of the way things used to be.
[Amit Varma]: But maybe I'm just being pessimistic.
[Guest]: No, I think at the core lies commonality of fate.
[Guest]: You know, I always give this example, that a mosquito is more socialist than Karl Marx.
[Guest]: It makes no distinction while it bites between rich or poor.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I've got to express a pet peeve here, which is that a lot of people use the
[Amit Varma]: word socialist, as if it is caring about society.
[Amit Varma]: And actually, socialism is extreme coercion, as we've seen in, and that sentence is still
[Amit Varma]: right, because a mosquito is, of course, being coercive, you will never consent to a mosquito
[Unknown]: taking your blood.
[Amit Varma]: So in that sense, it's absolutely kind of true.
[Amit Varma]: Let's, you know, there are two strands I'm fascinated by.
[Guest]: But I'll just complete the thought, so the point is, unless and until you have that realization
[Guest]: of the commonality of fate, that if today somebody is suffering, and we aren't working
[Guest]: towards solving the person's problem, sooner or later, it's going to really come back and
[Guest]: impact us.
[Guest]: And what better time than a pandemic to realize that, right?
[Guest]: So the mosquito can be substituted with the COVID virus.
[Guest]: And I think slowly and steadily, people are really reaching that conclusion.
[Guest]: So no matter what jingoism we see on social media, and our Twitter timelines and our Instagram
[Guest]: timelines, the fact of the matter is that there is an increasing realization that all
[Guest]: so called existing traditional parties have failed, status quo is unsustainable, we are
[Guest]: slowly getting there is just about when you reach the tipping point, because also see
[Guest]: the way change takes place.
[Guest]: Just think about a weighing scale, and you have, let's say, 100 grams in one on the other
[Guest]: side, you're just putting one one gram each, and it won't tip till 101.
[Guest]: So even though there is a lot of work that is happening, even though there is a lot of
[Guest]: manthan, so to say, it's still it still will tip only with that, with that 101.
[Guest]: So the tipping point is near.
[Guest]: And I am a little more optimistic than you are, that people will vote see, because coming
[Guest]: back to our experience in the 2017 election, when we went to the Election Commission, and
[Guest]: we told them that, look, you guys are doing a good job of increasing voting percentage.
[Guest]: And I think we can do this better than you and you should basically trust us.
[Guest]: And we did a number of things with them to engage young people.
[Guest]: And there was an increased voting percentage.
[Guest]: This was the same time that I'm not going to take names, but some prominent advertising
[Guest]: firms and some so called creative agencies came back to me and told me, but Mumbai is
[Guest]: an apolitical city.
[Guest]: And you know, all of what you're saying is true for Delhi, which is a very political,
[Guest]: you know, we are really stuck into just going to work and coming back and not being able
[Guest]: to do anything.
[Guest]: But that's wrong.
[Guest]: So if you actually engage with people, I think, you know, as JP says, again, that we are as
[Guest]: good or as bad as any other people anywhere in the world.
[Guest]: So we are all people who respond to incentives.
[Guest]: If bad behavior goes unpunished, and good behavior goes unrewarded, there is there is
[Guest]: nothing, there's no incentive for really doing good.
[Guest]: So over a period of time, I think people are slowly realizing that good governance is an
[Guest]: incentive is a major incentive.
[Guest]: And we are really going to see that tipping point come sooner or later.
[Amit Varma]: I hope you're right.
[Amit Varma]: You're, of course, much closer to the ground.
[Amit Varma]: So maybe you have more reason to be optimistic, but perhaps you're much closer to the ground
[Unknown]: because you're optimistic to begin with.
[Amit Varma]: So we'll never know.
[Amit Varma]: But you speak about people responding to incentives.
[Amit Varma]: And there I sort of like one of the strands I want to unpack is that that strand of local
[Amit Varma]: governance.
[Amit Varma]: Like I remember, episode 31 of my show was with Shruti Rajgopalan, where we spoke about
[Amit Varma]: urban governance.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the big sort of TIL moments there for me was learning that how at the level
[Amit Varma]: of local politics, there is a mismatch between power and accountability, in the sense that
[Amit Varma]: your MLA is relying on vote banks from elsewhere, not necessarily your little urban vote bank.
[Amit Varma]: So he doesn't really have the incentive to serve you.
[Amit Varma]: Whereas the people that you do elect and that you have power over your local corporator,
[Amit Varma]: their powers are very restricted, their budgets are restricted, you know, most of your taxes
[Amit Varma]: go to the center, not enough of it devolves down at the local level.
[Amit Varma]: So you might have some local concerns, but you have, you know, no way to the people who
[Amit Varma]: are accountable to you don't have the power or the money to do anything about that.
[Amit Varma]: And there is therefore this fundamental mismatch, which would also explain what you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: earlier that, you know, people are excited about voting in Lok Sabha elections a little
[Amit Varma]: less Vidhan Sabha, but at the BMC level, not at all, because, you know, what difference
[Amit Varma]: is it going to make to my life?
[Amit Varma]: How much is that an accurate impression in the sense, specifically, at the level of the
[Amit Varma]: BMC or the municipality or whichever city, what can the local government do?
[Guest]: And what can it not do?
[Guest]: So I think a lot of things.
[Guest]: So when we speak about decentralization of power, we can hear a lot of noise, but we
[Guest]: should focus on three things, funds, functions and functionaries.
[Guest]: And I think if you look at urban governance from that lens, you what you've realized is
[Guest]: that you've seen the legislature metamorphosing into the executive, you can't make out the
[Guest]: difference.
[Guest]: So the net result is that the MLA that you elect, you expect him to be the face of the
[Guest]: government.
[Guest]: He's basically a lawmaker.
[Guest]: And maybe because he's an elected representative, he can hold the government accountable, but
[Guest]: he is not the government.
[Guest]: So in a situation where you A, have reduced avenues of participation, B, you have these
[Guest]: indirect accountability and you have the not-so-steel framework of India, the rusted framework of
[Guest]: India operating and even more rusted framework of the lower bureaucracy operating, the whole
[Guest]: thing is one big mess.
[Guest]: And all in all, you can have a good IAS officer who is a genuine guy, a nice guy who is well-meaning.
[Guest]: But all said and done, unless and until you do not have that local participation, the
[Guest]: grassroots to ensure last mile delivery, nothing really happens.
[Guest]: So let's look at BMC for that matter.
[Guest]: There is no new project, which is a capital expense project taken up for a long time.
[Guest]: The coastal road was the first such thing done in a long period of time.
[Guest]: All the bulk of the thing is maintaining old projects.
[Guest]: And I mean, you have the same road, you would have experienced this, right?
[Guest]: The same road is dug on multiple occasions.
[Guest]: How difficult it is to set up your what is called ducting to ensure that each time there
[Guest]: is a new line that the road is not dug open and stuff like that.
[Guest]: So the reason why you have this mess is because status quo benefits the existing economy here.
[Guest]: You look at the contracts, the way it is operated, blacklisted contractors get awarded the contract.
[Guest]: If they're blacklisted in one ward, they apply in another ward, it's one contiguous set of
[Guest]: people who are actually beneficiaries at all levels.
[Guest]: So whether it is tenders, whether it's contracts, whether it is, it's poor execution, whether
[Guest]: it is, it's repeated execution of the same set of things without giving much thought.
[Guest]: I mean, it just lies in Lentatus.
[Guest]: Let's take the DP for that matter, the so called DP 2034, which took like, which got
[Guest]: cancelled twice and, you know, everybody spoke about, oh, we should speak about zoning and
[Guest]: we should speak about sharing our, I mean, conserving our open spaces, you know, how
[Guest]: many, how much of that gets implemented 17%.
[Guest]: So why go with this entire exercise of only 17% of it basically gets implemented.
[Guest]: But the point that I'm trying to make is much larger, that in all your cities, you basically
[Guest]: do not A, have direct accountability, B, people do not have a say in the agenda that the council
[Guest]: basically takes.
[Guest]: So basically, people aren't able to hold people accountable from the time that they've elected
[Guest]: them till the next election.
[Guest]: And also, then we get into the kind of democratic systems that we have.
[Guest]: So we have the first past the post system, which clearly incentivizes vote bank politics.
[Guest]: So you just need a combination of whatever lens you look at it, castes, or maybe linguistic
[Guest]: groups, or maybe socioeconomic groups, which basically give you the threshold of 30, 31%,
[Guest]: depending upon the number of people in a particular constituency.
[Guest]: And that's why you have the results that you do.
[Guest]: But that said, I think, when you have a directly elected mayor, when you have a directly elected
[Guest]: chief minister, which is a model that we should slowly go towards.
[Guest]: So there is at least a distinction between the executive and the legislature than what
[Guest]: we have right now.
[Guest]: But the answer to your question is that, unless you don't have these avenues of participation,
[Guest]: no matter what you do, it's still going to remain the same.
[Guest]: But if you have these ward committees made, I have for five years in Juhu, we had this
[Guest]: ward committee, we had this group of 35 people plus people from the local commercial establishments
[Guest]: and shopkeepers associations, we would meet month after month and discuss issue after
[Guest]: issue.
[Guest]: So over a period of time, things do sort themselves out.
[Guest]: I mean, they will certainly not be as great as we expect them to be, but they would be
[Guest]: much better than the situation that we're in right now.
[Amit Varma]: Does it really make that much of a difference?
[Amit Varma]: Because I came across a 2011 article where you are expressing disillusionment with Adolf
[Amit Varma]: and saying that, hey, he didn't really do anything at the end of the day.
[Guest]: No.
[Guest]: So there is nuance there.
[Guest]: So in 2011, I think Adolf was a great corporator when it came to him working on the ground.
[Guest]: But when it came to his utilization of his funds, when it came to getting us projects,
[Guest]: but when it came to him raising questions in the house, I saw that that was really sad.
[Guest]: He just raised one question.
[Guest]: So now, of course, we've realized that there is, I mean, he had an issue with public speaking
[Guest]: and so on and so forth, which were learnings afterwards.
[Guest]: But the reason why that happened was because there was no institution to support him.
[Guest]: So while people like us supported him with the goodness of our hearts, he was still not
[Guest]: part of a political party.
[Guest]: There was no formal process to basically support him.
[Guest]: He was clearly overwhelmed with the kind of queries that he would get.
[Guest]: And I still would say, I would still give him a 10 on 10 on all of all of those things.
[Guest]: But I would certainly call him a failure when it came to him being our batsman in the house.
[Guest]: So we had this expectation that here would be Adolf.
[Guest]: So the only question that he asked was that Crawford Market thing.
[Guest]: So I would expect a counselor to, okay, may not basically be a Rubin kind of a personality,
[Guest]: but at least I told him that, you know, you don't have to be eloquent when it came to
[Guest]: corruption.
[Guest]: Because when somebody is robbing in your house, you don't really think about the grammar,
[Guest]: you will just directly go out there and say and do whatever you have to say and do.
[Guest]: So I think that is the only disillusionment, but again, that comes again to this model
[Guest]: of political intervention, that it can't be citizen candidates.
[Guest]: This is a romantic concept, which maybe was done as an experiment at that time, was a
[Guest]: good experiment.
[Guest]: But the future has to be political parties, the future, because the sad part is that we
[Guest]: look at political parties only in the pursuit of power.
[Guest]: But the goal of a political party is not the blind pursuit of power, it is the evolution
[Guest]: of leadership.
[Guest]: The goal is to basically nurse leadership in its ranks, to be able to support that leadership
[Guest]: when it comes to decision making, when it comes to their participation in the legislature,
[Guest]: and which some parties all said and done actually have a system which more or less functions.
[Guest]: Now, we can argue as to whether what those standards are and etc, etc.
[Guest]: But yeah, so that is my answer to the Adolf thing.
[Guest]: So again, just for the record, I still think he was phenomenally honest.
[Guest]: I am willing to put my neck on the line and say that he didn't take a single bribe in
[Guest]: five years.
[Guest]: But yeah, when it came to him basically being the largest spokesperson of the city, it was
[Amit Varma]: problematic.
[Amit Varma]: Fair enough.
[Amit Varma]: And I guess at some level, it's also, you know, you evaluate someone against a certain
[Amit Varma]: set of expectations.
[Amit Varma]: And you might realize later on that, you know, maybe these expectations were not...
[Guest]: Yeah, because let's say if, right now, I am involved in an experiment called the Indian
[Guest]: School of Democracy, run by Ujjwal, Ujjwalji, which is, again, something interesting.
[Guest]: It's about training people for the job that they seek to aspire for.
[Guest]: So if I want to be an elected representative, do I actually have the right training, the
[Guest]: right skill set, the right exposure, which prepares me for my job?
[Guest]: Adolf didn't have that.
[Guest]: And we thought that he would learn on the job, but that didn't happen.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm going to take issue with something you said that is, you know, almost delightfully
[Amit Varma]: idealistic, where you said that, you know, the job of a political party is to build leadership
[Amit Varma]: and it's not the naked pursuit of power.
[Amit Varma]: Wait a minute.
[Guest]: It is a naked pursuit of power.
[Guest]: Of course, I am not impractical.
[Guest]: Of course, whatever a political party does is to pursue power.
[Guest]: But that can be done in a way that you nurture leadership.
[Amit Varma]: Let me sort of continue down that line.
[Amit Varma]: You know, people keep lamenting that the quality of our leaders today is so bad and look at
[Amit Varma]: the independence movement and we had, you know, Patel and Nehru and Rajaji and all of
[Amit Varma]: these people.
[Amit Varma]: And what do we have now?
[Amit Varma]: And I'd once written a column arguing that it comes down to incentives, that that generation
[Amit Varma]: of leaders, they became leaders not because they lusted for power, because there were
[Amit Varma]: no rewards to be had for them.
[Amit Varma]: They were animated by principle that we want to make this country a better place, we want
[Amit Varma]: to do something for people.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, we had that quality of leadership today and they were responding to those incentives.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, if you think about what incentives a post-independence politician is responding
[Amit Varma]: to, higher principles don't matter anymore.
[Amit Varma]: It's about you've got a parasitic state.
[Amit Varma]: They want to have the levers of the parasitic state and the monopoly on violence and so
[Amit Varma]: that they can use some of that power to, you know, power here is not a means to an end
[Amit Varma]: for them.
[Amit Varma]: It's an end in itself.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, my sort of cynical take on Indian politics is that even when people get
[Amit Varma]: into politics for the best of intentions, they will inevitably get corrupted because
[Amit Varma]: there is a fundamental clash between the will to power and whatever principles you may believe
[Amit Varma]: in that ultimately you cannot achieve anything without coming to power, you know, and especially
[Amit Varma]: in the bigger elections, you need money to come to power.
[Amit Varma]: So first, you need to think of which vote banks you're going to appeal to, you are funded
[Amit Varma]: by special interests who will want their pound of flesh.
[Amit Varma]: And you can rationalize all of that and say that it's, you know, I'll make these small
[Amit Varma]: compromises as long as I can, you know, for a higher cause.
[Amit Varma]: But ultimately, you know, politics is corrosive because power always corrupts.
[Guest]: So that is a very libertarian, a nice argument to look at.
[Amit Varma]: But the way I look at it is, I'll tell you something, it's not a libertarian argument
[Amit Varma]: because the argument is not against the state.
[Amit Varma]: The argument is against this structure of the state.
[Amit Varma]: If the state was much more local and if politicians were accountable, and if the only way they
[Amit Varma]: could, you know, stay in power was by actually doing something for people, you know, so it's
[Amit Varma]: a response to the dysfunctional nature of our state.
[Amit Varma]: And we can come to specific examples of how that kind of corrosion of character also happens,
[Amit Varma]: but sorry, broadly.
[Guest]: No, so see, so there are two ways of looking at it.
[Guest]: One is if you're looking at change, you can either do a big ticket reform and hope for
[Guest]: the big ticket reform to make all these changes.
[Guest]: Or you can do many small things, which are not equal to the big ticket reform.
[Guest]: But when done synchronously together, they are much bigger than the big ticket reform.
[Guest]: Let me give you an example.
[Guest]: So the playbook that you give, which is okay, you need money to win an election, because
[Guest]: you get money from some interest, you are beholden to those interests, and that cycle
[Guest]: continues as soon as you get elected to power and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: But you can change that.
[Guest]: All said and done, and at Aam Aadmi Party, I'm part of the fundraising team in Mumbai,
[Guest]: we consciously go after funding, which is crowdsourced, which is small.
[Guest]: So and also, we don't have that culture of political funding in the country.
[Guest]: I mean, when I go to my friends and say, listen, I'm in politics, and we're contesting the
[Guest]: elections and you should fund and clean an honest party, people ask me why.
[Guest]: People are just bewildered with it, you know, you're in power in Delhi, you should basically
[Guest]: work something out.
[Guest]: So A, that culture, that political culture, B, you can certainly disrupt the playbook.
[Guest]: So if you have existing set of castes and languages and various other groups being brought
[Guest]: together, you can disrupt that, and people do respond to that disruption.
[Guest]: Look at what has happened in Delhi, the Arvind Kejriwal playbook of winning election was
[Guest]: basically that disruption of politics, that he suddenly said that, hey, I am the advocate
[Guest]: of the poor, I am the voice of the oppressed, and you had a new kind of a vote bank being
[Guest]: created of people who felt disenfranchised, people who felt disempowered, people who felt
[Guest]: cheated, and, and you've now been able to disrupt it to the extent that you got elected
[Guest]: three times.
[Amit Varma]: So disruption is possible, if you, if you change the playbook.
[Amit Varma]: Disruption is possible when it comes to the will to power, the road to power.
[Amit Varma]: So I totally grant that, that Arvind Kejriwal as a political entrepreneur, sheer genius,
[Amit Varma]: got the job done.
[Amit Varma]: But he also claimed to stand for a new kind of politics and certain principles.
[Amit Varma]: Now, for example, what we saw last year, 370 was abolished, not a peep out of him.
[Amit Varma]: The CAA protests happened, you know, not a peep out of him.
[Amit Varma]: And I understand that at one level, your rationale is that, listen, we are doing a lot of things
[Amit Varma]: when it comes to, you know, water and electricity and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And to be able to do these things, we don't want to get into these controversies.
[Amit Varma]: But that's exactly what I mean, that your will to power is so strong that you're saying,
[Amit Varma]: what about principles?
[Amit Varma]: Or when Vishal Dadlani had to apologize to that Jain Moni, because hey, vote bank.
[Amit Varma]: So where are your principles then?
[Amit Varma]: In other contexts, you speak about free speech, but then you make your guy apologize.
[Guest]: No, no.
[Guest]: So no, no, it's there are too many issues.
[Unknown]: Okay, I'm sorry.
[Unknown]: I'll allow you to answer it one by one.
[Guest]: Number one, Arvind did speak when it came to 370.
[Guest]: He supported the abolishing of 370.
[Guest]: But he's never supported the disruption of JNK or the complete suspension of the internet
[Guest]: and the crackdown that the state has on its population, number one.
[Guest]: So he's spoken.
[Guest]: It's not that he hasn't spoken.
[Guest]: On CAA, he's spoken.
[Guest]: So let me use this example.
[Guest]: We as a country are a very religious country.
[Guest]: If you typically see last time census, just 33,000 people have basically identified themselves
[Guest]: as atheists.
[Guest]: So whether people may practice religion in the conventional sense or not, they certainly
[Guest]: identify themselves with religion.
[Guest]: So if you have an Arvind Kejriwal come up with an alternative version of religion, which
[Guest]: is tackling the religion of hate, bigotry, which we have seen so institutionalized and
[Guest]: normalized, then why are we being penalized for being smart?
[Guest]: We won that election.
[Guest]: I mean, we all saw what happened at JNU.
[Amit Varma]: We are a government which doesn't have control over the police force.
[Amit Varma]: Let me just interject here with one thing that we won that election is not a defense
[Amit Varma]: of this point.
[Amit Varma]: Even Modi won an election, right?
[Amit Varma]: And we are both against.
[Guest]: No, the point.
[Guest]: No, no, no.
[Guest]: What does that even prove?
[Guest]: No.
[Guest]: The point that I'm trying to make is that had we had the police, we would have certainly
[Guest]: did whatever people were expecting of us.
[Guest]: An election where you are contesting with limited amount of resources, when you have
[Guest]: the complete might of the BJP machinery in the state, you have to be smart.
[Guest]: You have to be nimble.
[Guest]: You have to control your narrative.
[Guest]: He did that.
[Guest]: All said and done.
[Amit Varma]: And that is what delivered us the victory.
[Amit Varma]: No, but you don't understand.
[Amit Varma]: I accept that reasoning as a reasoning for winning elections.
[Amit Varma]: I admire his political acumen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm not arguing on any of those.
[Amit Varma]: We are not disputing his political acumen.
[Amit Varma]: What I am saying is that he has mastered the will to power bit, but he has no principles.
[Guest]: Because for example, let's go back to the January.
[Amit Varma]: Have you stopped working with the poor?
[Amit Varma]: Tell me something.
[Amit Varma]: No, let's go back to, for example, the apology that Vishal Dadlani was forced to make.
[Amit Varma]: Now would he have made the same apology if it was a saint who was a BJP person?
[Guest]: One second, Vishal Dadlani is an individual in his own right.
[Guest]: He is a friend and I think he is best suited to comment over that.
[Guest]: Had it been a political party functioning, I would have responded to it.
[Guest]: This is a private individual.
[Guest]: What happened there was a decision that he took.
[Guest]: And I'd leave it at that.
[Amit Varma]: I think it's the wrong example.
[Amit Varma]: So Arvind didn't ask him that, hey, by say, sorry, these are important people for us.
[Guest]: I'm not that high up in the party to know what transpired back then.
[Amit Varma]: Okay.
[Amit Varma]: So fair enough.
[Amit Varma]: It's an unfair question for you.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, you are right that he's a private individual and a great artist, by the way.
[Amit Varma]: It's a rational decision what, you know, for Arvind to have told Vishal that if he did
[Amit Varma]: tell him that and for Vishal to actually take, it's all rational.
[Amit Varma]: But I'm saying that in that case, it's rational in the pursuit of a certain practicality which
[Amit Varma]: leads to your winning elections.
[Amit Varma]: If the question is to be asked that you stand for a new kind of politics, what principles
[Amit Varma]: do you stand for?
[Amit Varma]: And you know, honestly, everything that he said with regards to 370 and CAA was very
[Amit Varma]: weak.
[Guest]: You know, he did not take the sort of stances that...
[Guest]: So I'm a little surprised.
[Guest]: I mean, suddenly, Shiv Sena seems to have become the darling of the liberal janta.
[Amit Varma]: Not mine.
[Guest]: Maybe.
[Guest]: But I'm just speaking in terms of the narrative.
[Guest]: We not only passed a resolution in the house, we voted against it in the Lok Sabha.
[Guest]: When it comes to every issue of national importance, be it demonetization.
[Guest]: He was the first person who called it a national, this is a national international scam.
[Guest]: What has happened when it comes to the migrant worker crisis.
[Guest]: He's been the first person to speak when it came to the farm bills.
[Amit Varma]: But here's the thing.
[Amit Varma]: Here's the thing.
[Amit Varma]: What I'm pointing out is that in each of these principles, no, let me, no, no, they're not.
[Amit Varma]: I'll tell you why.
[Amit Varma]: Why?
[Amit Varma]: Because in each of these cases, he's responding to rational incentives.
[Amit Varma]: Let me go through each of them.
[Amit Varma]: Farm bill, he's speaking for the farmers because Aam Aadmi Party wants to win elections in
[Amit Varma]: Punjab at some point.
[Amit Varma]: Farmers are a big vote bank.
[Amit Varma]: There's your vote bank.
[Guest]: Farmers are a vote bank across the country.
[Guest]: Why just Punjab?
[Guest]: I'm saying because that's Aam Aadmi Party's interest.
[Amit Varma]: That is just one.
[Guest]: One of the many lenses.
[Guest]: And we would always speak for our farmers.
[Guest]: We are an agrarian country at the end of the day.
[Amit Varma]: So why just look at our comment about farmers only in the context of Punjab?
[Amit Varma]: Because it's the farmers of Punjab who are mainly protesting right now.
[Amit Varma]: The farmers of Maharashtra aren't.
[Amit Varma]: Let's face it.
[Amit Varma]: And moving on from there, you know, as far as I disagree with that, but yeah, sure.
[Amit Varma]: But as far as demonetization is concerned, and I'm not taking a stand with or against
[Amit Varma]: the farm bills, nor am I saying that Aam Aadmi Party is, you know, out of all the parties,
[Amit Varma]: they're probably the, I shouldn't use a phrase, least evil or you will get offended.
[Amit Varma]: But in all those other cases, demon toh theek hai because there's no danger in speaking
[Amit Varma]: against demon or all of this.
[Amit Varma]: But when it comes to sort of the 370, when it comes to CAA, you know, he doesn't want
[Amit Varma]: to piss off certain vote banks.
[Amit Varma]: And the unfortunate truth of Indian politics is that every mainstream party, including
[Amit Varma]: the Congress, of course, is very wary of pissing off what they perceive to be the Hindu vote
[Amit Varma]: bank.
[Guest]: So I don't think so.
[Guest]: I think Arvind has redefined the Hindu vote bank, Arvind in whether it is his personal
[Guest]: display of religiosity, or a very simple aspect of an all-embracing, communitarian aspect
[Guest]: of religion, whether it is the Diwali puja or anything else for that matter has redefined
[Guest]: this vote bank by saying that you can be a Hindu and that can be one of your identities
[Guest]: that may be the primary identity for a lot of people.
[Guest]: But there is a better way of basically being Hindu than the standard playbook, which is
[Guest]: being peddled by a few people.
[Guest]: So that's that's that's being intelligent, that's being smart.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, fair enough.
[Amit Varma]: I don't want to litigate this too much.
[Amit Varma]: I'm also sort of reminded of what one of your early mentors, Mayank Gandhi, once said about
[Amit Varma]: him in his book Up and Down, where Mayank wrote, quote, let's recall the Arvind I had
[Amit Varma]: first befriended.
[Amit Varma]: He was a man who cared for the poor and the underprivileged.
[Amit Varma]: He was a man committed to changing the nation without any desire for power or any inclination
[Amit Varma]: to engage with messy politicking.
[Amit Varma]: Yet by 2014, the same man had surrounded himself with unsavory people, built a coterie and
[Amit Varma]: abandoned all that we stood for, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And in my mind, you know, this is a classic example of how the will to power leads to
[Amit Varma]: the abandonment of principles in a system like ours.
[Guest]: No, no, please understand, please look at the context of this.
[Guest]: We were literally the victims of a witch hunt of a government which put nearly 22 of our
[Guest]: MLAs in jail, all coincidentally have been thrown out by the courts.
[Guest]: We are the only government in the history of this country which had control of an anti-corruption
[Guest]: bureau where paramilitary forces were sent in the premises of the ACB to take physical
[Guest]: control of it.
[Guest]: So the kind of a witch hunt and the kind of a crackdown, the way our donors were basically
[Guest]: harassed because they supported us in multiple instances.
[Guest]: So you happen, you need to run a very tight ship and all of this and Arvind basically
[Guest]: taking control, making sure that we do the right thing and we do the right thing in the
[Guest]: right way.
[Guest]: So the political entrepreneurship of it, because one slip here and there with the kind of,
[Guest]: you have a media which just looks towards this amplifying propaganda of you know who.
[Guest]: So all of this basically comes from that, that well, we were being literally attacked
[Guest]: from all sides, we are a small party, we have to stay relevant, we have to win elections,
[Guest]: we have to deliver on our promise and we have to create this new governance model and this
[Guest]: new political culture that we keep talking about.
[Guest]: But that said, I disagree with Mayank Gandhi.
[Guest]: I mean he is my mentor and I have a lot of respect for him and I will still consider
[Guest]: him my mentor for the rest of my life.
[Guest]: But I disagree with this and all said and done, Mayank Gandhi doesn't speak anything
[Guest]: about Narendra Modi, not once.
[Guest]: If you say Kejriwal has surrounded himself with yes-men, no, I don't think so.
[Guest]: I think most people expect that most parties are going to be transparent to their strategies,
[Guest]: that's not true.
[Guest]: I know Arvind personally, I have engaged with him at multiple points in time and he's somebody
[Guest]: who surrounds himself with people who tell him the truth.
[Guest]: That may not be perceived as people telling him the truth and it's very easy to label
[Guest]: some people yes-men, but that's not true at all.
[Guest]: He's a politician who has his ears to the ground and he has, he's always open to new
[Guest]: ideas and new people all around and the journey continues.
[Guest]: This argument that Mayank has of, and I've read the book and I mentioned in the book
[Guest]: at three or four instances, so it all sounds, the ISE part sounds as though it was extremely
[Guest]: romantic and here is Arvind Kejriwal who has exactly become the villain that he led a movement
[Guest]: against.
[Guest]: That's not true at all.
[Guest]: And I say this with a lot of responsibility.
[Guest]: If you're a member of a political party, you're expected to conform with some discipline.
[Guest]: Are you saying that all of us agree with everything that our leaders say?
[Guest]: Of course, there are moments of disagreement, but there are party fora where that has to
[Guest]: be discussed.
[Guest]: If you have a disagreement with some decision or some policy, you can raise it in a particular
[Guest]: way.
[Guest]: And I think what Mayank Gandhi did was not just opportunistic, but he...
[Amit Varma]: Or what Yogendra Yadav and Prashant Bhushan and...
[Guest]: No, what did Yogendra...
[Amit Varma]: I remember a moment, there was this documentary made on the Aam Aadmi Party and there's one
[Amit Varma]: moment in that which I found very telling and correct me if I remember it wrong, but
[Amit Varma]: at one point, you know, Arvind says that, listen, all our candidates will be elected
[Amit Varma]: by primaries.
[Amit Varma]: And at another point, he says, I don't care about the primary, this is a person that I
[Amit Varma]: want.
[Amit Varma]: Do you remember that moment?
[Guest]: Am I misremembering?
[Amit Varma]: No, no, no, no, no, no.
[Guest]: So please understand.
[Guest]: When you...
[Guest]: No, no.
[Guest]: So there's a context to this.
[Guest]: When you actually did an experiment of a primary, you had people participate such that the worst
[Guest]: candidate would have basically become your candidate.
[Guest]: So when you are setting up an institutional system, no, no, no, no.
[Guest]: My point is, all of this should be done.
[Guest]: All of this will be done.
[Guest]: All of this is being done in some measure.
[Guest]: But it is, it will take some time.
[Amit Varma]: So his stance here is basically have a primary, but I will only accept it if you pick the
[Guest]: guy I think is best.
[Guest]: No, that's not true at all.
[Guest]: That's what you just said, that they picked the wrong guy.
[Guest]: No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no.
[Guest]: This experiment comes from a Lok Satta experiment, doesn't come from an Aam Aadmi Party experiment,
[Guest]: where they actually held a primary and everybody participated.
[Guest]: More people participated than there are, because it was an open primary.
[Guest]: And there was basically an ex-candidate who would basically come.
[Guest]: And a not so, so-called ideal candidate would end up becoming the candidate.
[Guest]: So I am saying that we are a political party, which is a work in progress.
[Guest]: After independence, which political party has basically built itself brick by brick
[Guest]: without so-called money, muscle, power and divisive agenda?
[Amit Varma]: No, I have already granted that, political entrepreneurship, 10 out of 10.
[Guest]: No, so that, no, that political culture, that political culture about people participating,
[Guest]: people selecting candidates.
[Guest]: And selecting candidates is a complex decision.
[Guest]: It is not as simple as people just voting for a particular person.
[Guest]: It has to be the person's ability to be able to raise resources, it has to be the person's
[Guest]: political maturity.
[Guest]: There is a lot that goes into it.
[Guest]: And I think over a period of time, if you're really looking at us from since we were in
[Guest]: existence since 2008, 13 years now, over a period of time, if you look at it from 20,
[Guest]: 25 years, all of these things will basically come in place.
[Unknown]: This is a matter of time.
[Guest]: We are a political startup.
[Guest]: We are struggling in adverse, all said and done, as you said, in the political entrepreneurship
[Guest]: in the most adversarial conditions, we are still after the Congress and BJP, at least
[Guest]: in the mind of public imagination, we exist.
[Guest]: So if you look at it from a, be a little kind to us, and I think all of all of what we hope
[Guest]: in terms of that new political culture in terms of these institutionalized mechanisms,
[Guest]: you'll get to see see it in in some time.
[Amit Varma]: No, I realize and I'm feeling bad now that I'm being very unkind.
[Amit Varma]: So I should maybe clarify that one thing.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, this not as an let me let me finish.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, this not as an indictment of Kejriwala or Aam Aadmi Party, I mean, this as an indictment
[Amit Varma]: of politics, especially in India, and the way it can corrode principle.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm just talking sort of it seems to me to be an illustration of that abstract point.
[Amit Varma]: The other thing that I'd, you know, just to sort of express why I feel strongly about
[Amit Varma]: this, because when 370 happened, and CAA happened, it's part of a continuing pattern of a society
[Amit Varma]: basically constantly being fractured, being torn apart by this dirty, divisive communal
[Amit Varma]: politics that is happening around us.
[Amit Varma]: And you expect people in the opposition to stand up against it.
[Amit Varma]: And instead, what we saw in Delhi was this very rational politician saying that I won't
[Amit Varma]: go too deep into this, I am not going to speak in support of the Shaheen Bagh protesters,
[Amit Varma]: I am not getting, you know, I need to win the next election to continue to do the good
[Amit Varma]: governance that I would like to do.
[Guest]: Sorry, on this one, you hear what Sanjay Singh has to say, he's very clear, he's very clear
[Guest]: about the CAA.
[Guest]: You see what Arvind's interview, he's extremely clear about the CAA.
[Guest]: This is wrong, this must be stopped.
[Guest]: And we are a political party which voted against it, as opposed to a Shiv Sena which voted
[Guest]: in one house for it and voted in one house against it.
[Guest]: And if you see how we have responded on both those points, please see what we've done in
[Guest]: the assembly.
[Guest]: Please see how our MPs have responded, please see what Arvind has basically said.
[Guest]: And while in terms of the popular narrative, there is this so-called narrative being woven,
[Guest]: that is not how it is.
[Guest]: And anyone who knows Arvind, anyone who's seen what we've done, anyone who's seen the
[Guest]: kind of work that we've done in minority areas, with our minority MLAs, will clearly say that
[Guest]: it's completely contrary to what the truth on the ground is.
[Guest]: And our work is there for all to see.
[Guest]: So hopefully we'll hear some feedback from people in Delhi.
[Amit Varma]: Your work is there for all to see, but you can cherry pick those parts of the work which
[Amit Varma]: someone like me will agree with.
[Amit Varma]: But there are other parts of the work which I don't agree with, where I can see you responding
[Amit Varma]: to incentives.
[Amit Varma]: For example, you're against FDI and retail.
[Amit Varma]: And that is obviously because a significant part of your crowdsource funds must come from
[Amit Varma]: small retailers.
[Amit Varma]: They are an interest group over there.
[Amit Varma]: And to me, that is a form of corruption.
[Amit Varma]: How is it not a form of corruption?
[Amit Varma]: Instead of, you know, and even if I don't want to use such a strong term, you are responding
[Amit Varma]: to those incentives.
[Amit Varma]: And the core of it, like I remember many years back, I had written a column, saying something
[Amit Varma]: good about Kejriwal, by the way, I'd written a column arguing how sociopaths and sociopathy,
[Amit Varma]: by the way, is a medical condition where a certain part of the brain, there is damage,
[Amit Varma]: you don't feel empathy and whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And statistics show that sociopaths are over represented among prison convicts, which you
[Amit Varma]: would expect lawyers and politicians, or bankers and politicians, whatever.
[Amit Varma]: And my argument was that if you look at most Indian politicians, like, you know, Modi was
[Amit Varma]: the example I took.
[Amit Varma]: And I said that, you know, a classic sociopath politician will do whatever it takes to come
[Amit Varma]: to power and not have any principles.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm used aloud that maybe Modi might even be an atheist for all we know, it doesn't
[Amit Varma]: matter.
[Amit Varma]: He'll do whatever it takes to come to power.
[Amit Varma]: And in that column, I wrote that Arvind Kejriwal doesn't seem to be a man who's a sociopath.
[Amit Varma]: He seems to be someone who is, has a lot of heart, who has a lot of heart, genuinely believes
[Amit Varma]: in all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And instantly one of my friends who, you know, lives and works in Delhi and whom I respect
[Amit Varma]: a lot, called me up and said, Amit, you are wrong.
[Amit Varma]: He is a big sociopath.
[Guest]: No, no, no.
[Guest]: I think I have known Arvind for the first time, coincidentally, Arvind came to Mumbai
[Guest]: was in 2009, when we had this experiment after the Adolfo de Souza win in Juhu, we tried
[Guest]: to do something in Andheri, we didn't succeed.
[Guest]: So I know Arvind since the Adolf era.
[Guest]: And I have known him, see, the thing is, in politics, you have to be extremely headstrong.
[Guest]: Just like any entrepreneur, that's your personality type.
[Guest]: And all of whatever Arvind has done, it certainly comes out of empathy.
[Guest]: I mean, imagine to be able to work for the voiceless and the people who come from one
[Guest]: of some of the most vulnerable and poor sections of society who don't make, who aren't represented
[Guest]: on the Twitter universe, who aren't represented on the Instagram universe.
[Guest]: And then you have all kinds of judgment calls being made and all kinds of aspersions being
[Guest]: cast.
[Guest]: But such is politics.
[Guest]: So when, I mean, even me sitting here, I think when you take a decision to be in public life,
[Guest]: you have to be open to public scrutiny, and Arvind is a human at the end of the day.
[Guest]: And I think as a politician, also, he's evolved, if you wouldn't agree, over the last 10 years.
[Amit Varma]: I think he's an outstanding politician there, I'm not arguing at all, okay, let me make
[Amit Varma]: a case against myself.
[Guest]: No, but you're making him sound as, you know, he's immoral, which is not true.
[Amit Varma]: I'm saying he's responding to incentives.
[Amit Varma]: But let me let me come at that another way.
[Amit Varma]: And because we contain multitudes, as the cliche on the show goes, I'll now argue against
[Amit Varma]: myself.
[Amit Varma]: Let's say that you're a politician, you enter politics, because of certain principles you
[Amit Varma]: believe in.
[Amit Varma]: But you realize that along the way, you have to compromise.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you have two choices.
[Amit Varma]: Either you don't compromise, and you're out of politics, because you cannot win elections.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, you don't make much of a difference to society, you're doing piecemeal things.
[Amit Varma]: Or you say that, okay, I'll make whatever small compromises I have to, and I'll come
[Amit Varma]: to power.
[Amit Varma]: And in the end, it will be better than somebody much worse being in power.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems to me that the best way to rationalize the journey of the Aam Aadmi Party is that
[Amit Varma]: those compromises have been made for a larger, better cause.
[Guest]: I thought you'd agree with this part, at least.
[Guest]: You don't think?
[Guest]: Let me explain.
[Guest]: So I think, I think you're confounding two things.
[Guest]: One is that irrespective of what your ideology is, and irrespective of what your philosophy
[Guest]: is, or what your framework of thought is, irrespective of all of that, just to bring
[Guest]: governance to an acceptable level of governance is what the Aam Aadmi Party is focused on.
[Guest]: Right now, what you see, what we are focused on for the last five years, you see our focus
[Guest]: right now, it is about giving dignity to the common man, the common woman, so that they
[Guest]: have equality of opportunity, so on and so forth.
[Guest]: That is one part.
[Guest]: The second part is that I think we expect, and it's a good thing to expect so much of
[Guest]: us.
[Guest]: We're a political party, the end of the day, we are India's fastest growing political party.
[Guest]: We are an opposition in Punjab.
[Guest]: We are making a foray into Goa, into Uttarakhand.
[Guest]: We recently won over 140 seats in Maharashtra out of the 350, sorry, 300 we contested.
[Guest]: So we're a growing party.
[Guest]: It is, we do speak on all these issues.
[Guest]: But there is a narrative being created.
[Guest]: The opposition, the present opposition is the opposition that the BJP wants.
[Guest]: Clearly, they look at us as an existential threat.
[Guest]: And you see the whole thing, right?
[Guest]: When there was a witch hunt against our MLAs, the so called Congress ecosystems of the world
[Guest]: didn't have any problem with it.
[Guest]: That's fine, because they were, you know, the up and it's okay, they're getting obliterated,
[Guest]: and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: So you are basically against a lot of resources, you're, you're, you're no longer a flash in
[Guest]: the pan.
[Guest]: You've basically build a party, you are now slowly evolving that discourse into taking
[Guest]: that from taking that from an acceptable level of governance to actually looking at things
[Guest]: as a poverty is avoidable suffering, you're not now speaking about houses, you are, you're
[Guest]: now speaking about, about higher education and scholarships, and, and things like that.
[Guest]: So give it a little give it give it time for them to be able to lift the political discourse.
[Guest]: And that will take time.
[Guest]: That is not going to happen.
[Amit Varma]: Sure, sure.
[Amit Varma]: No, I mean, you know, first of all, I must clarify that I have less respect for the Congress
[Amit Varma]: and for up, I think this, this nation really needs a proper opposition, which hopefully,
[Amit Varma]: and I hope you guys can proceed in that direction.
[Amit Varma]: But to sort of continue with that abstract question, that let's say that as a politician,
[Amit Varma]: you are in that position where, you know, a politician doesn't have the luxury I do,
[Amit Varma]: you sit on the outside and you say whatever you want, and you have purity of ideology
[Amit Varma]: and whatever politician doesn't have that luxury, you have to compromise, you have to
[Guest]: figure out how to be practical without compromising.
[Guest]: And I and I'm reiterating that for the 10 time on this.
[Amit Varma]: So my question to you, which you know, you've you've perhaps answered is that at what is
[Amit Varma]: that baseline level where you say I will not compromise on this, what are those core values?
[Amit Varma]: And to sort of elaborate, one thing that it is very clear that Amadni Party stands for
[Amit Varma]: is that we'll provide good clean governance, that as far as water is concerned, and electricity
[Amit Varma]: is concerned, and all of those sort of local issues will provide good clean governance,
[Amit Varma]: fine.
[Amit Varma]: That's what you guys stand for.
[Amit Varma]: Take that granted.
[Amit Varma]: That's what you're working to do.
[Amit Varma]: Beyond that, are there any principles that you will not ever compromise on?
[Guest]: Of course.
[Guest]: Why do you think we're focusing on education?
[Guest]: Is it just education as a means to get a job?
[Guest]: Is that the only so called metric that we're looking at?
[Guest]: Of course not.
[Guest]: We're looking at a much better society, a much more empathetic society.
[Guest]: And all of that will happen with time.
[Guest]: I'm saying that you're expect is good that you're expecting that of us.
[Amit Varma]: I'll just interject since you brought up education, people talk about Amadni Party's great work
[Amit Varma]: in education in Delhi and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: Again, I've heard stories about friends of mine about what is happening to private schools.
[Amit Varma]: For example, there is this private school which was started by this lady after partition
[Amit Varma]: for children of refugees functioned perfectly fine all these years.
[Amit Varma]: And when the Amadni Party took over, they took over with this ideological aversion to
[Amit Varma]: private schools, and they came out with these price caps that you cannot charge more than
[Amit Varma]: this.
[Amit Varma]: And that became an existential threat to the school.
[Amit Varma]: When I last heard about this from a friend, their reserves had been wiped out.
[Amit Varma]: It was an existential threat.
[Amit Varma]: It was like this distrust of the voluntary action of people.
[Guest]: No, no, no, no, not at all.
[Guest]: Not at all.
[Guest]: If this might just basically be one one off case, if you see, generally, as a thumb rule,
[Guest]: you typically have private schools which charge a lot of money for not basically giving the
[Guest]: kind of facilities that the government gives.
[Guest]: And at the end of the day, what is the incentive for the government to fix the public schools
[Guest]: if a large number of the politicians typically run the private schools, which is typically
[Guest]: how it works across the board.
[Guest]: We have worked towards fixing that public education to the extent that it's quality
[Guest]: and this is something which will get tears to my eyes.
[Guest]: I have gone to these schools.
[Guest]: I have interacted with these children.
[Guest]: I have seen the learning outcomes, which is there for people to independently measure
[Amit Varma]: and assess.
[Amit Varma]: But Ruben, that's orthogonal.
[Amit Varma]: I'm not arguing about the public schools, granted, but the bottom line is parents need
[Amit Varma]: the choice.
[Amit Varma]: Now, what has happened over the last couple of decades, especially, and what has gone
[Amit Varma]: wrong is the fault of all other governments, not your government, and you're not even in
[Amit Varma]: power at the center, is that constantly, first of all, the impression that all private schools
[Amit Varma]: are expensive is rubbish.
[Amit Varma]: There are budget private schools all over the place, including in slums, let me finish,
[Amit Varma]: where poor parents, rather than send their kid to a free government school, prefer to
[Amit Varma]: pay a little bit and send them to a budget private school and all of that, and they've
[Amit Varma]: been hit hard by regulation.
[Amit Varma]: That's a story of the past, predates Aam Aadmi Party, not your fault.
[Amit Varma]: But what I would expect is that while you're fixing public education, let private schools
[Amit Varma]: continue to operate, don't get in the way of the voluntary action of people.
[Amit Varma]: If a parent wants to send a child to a school, let the parent do so, it's a parent's choice.
[Amit Varma]: This ideological dogmatism that we have seen from
[Guest]: I don't, I don't happen to have enough of information to make a comment on that.
[Guest]: Kind of.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So let's sort of leave that aside.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, fair enough.
[Amit Varma]: So let's move on from the Aam Aadmi Party.
[Guest]: You know, we can come back to the Aam Aadmi Party.
[Guest]: It is the second love of my life, after my mother, so we can speak about it as much as
[Guest]: you want.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, now let's go back to your political journey.
[Amit Varma]: You know, initially you get into politics because you want to do good things, you realize
[Amit Varma]: that at the level of private charity or whatever, things are happening in a piecemeal way and
[Amit Varma]: you decide that if you want to do more fundamental good, you have to enter politics and you enter
[Amit Varma]: politics.
[Amit Varma]: Now beyond this initial urge, how does your understanding of Indian politics evolve?
[Amit Varma]: Like you've said that JP played a part in that and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: What are the big sort of learnings that you took, you know, through your years of political
[Guest]: activism once you got into it?
[Guest]: So I think politics is basically a full time vocation, though I'm sadly a part time politician
[Guest]: who has to juggle with a corporate job.
[Guest]: Second is that we do not have a culture which basically supports political aspirants.
[Guest]: I still remember I was in college and, you know, I took an aptitude test and the person
[Guest]: asked me, what do you want to be? and I said, while I know I'm a good engineer, I mean,
[Guest]: I would want to be an engineer and etc.
[Guest]: I would always want to be a politician.
[Guest]: I always knew that I had really a lot of clarity on thought and purpose for it.
[Guest]: But it wasn't just one of the things that people would factor in.
[Guest]: Second, I remember I went for my first job.
[Guest]: It was on campus placement.
[Guest]: And I remember after I joined the political party, I went to the HR and I said, listen,
[Guest]: I've joined the political party and now I'm an office bearer.
[Guest]: And these are the details and my activities are in no way going to harm the company's
[Guest]: interest and we're not doing anything lawful.
[Guest]: I mean, I nearly lost my job.
[Guest]: I had to argue against interests.
[Guest]: I had to, the HR would tell me that no, how can we basically encourage such a thing.
[Guest]: And I tried to give examples because that was an MNC and there are, you know, people
[Guest]: who are part of political parties in Europe and in America and that's fine.
[Guest]: Then why are you frowning down upon it in India?
[Guest]: And I think that is a problem when it comes to India that you, even right now, if you
[Guest]: are a member of a political party, nobody would want to write that down in the resume.
[Guest]: I, on the other hand, have always been extremely clear because I don't want people to view
[Guest]: these, view my association with a political party as a surprise.
[Guest]: So there is no culture.
[Guest]: In that, in that situation, what does a person do?
[Guest]: How does a person earn his livelihood if he is not this traditional entrepreneur?
[Guest]: If he doesn't really come from a very affluent family, which is why you have so many lawyers
[Guest]: as you just gave the example of in both the categories, are entrepreneurs.
[Guest]: So when you look at the Jeffersonian model of democracy, which is that the more you have,
[Guest]: the more small businesses you have, the more entrepreneurs you have, the more meaningful
[Guest]: the participation in the political discourse.
[Guest]: So yeah, the answer to all of this is entrepreneurship because then you can work for yourself without
[Guest]: being answerable to so-called whims of these structures, which beyond a point in time doesn't
[Guest]: really make sense because we all know in our corporate life that we are working 24-7, right?
[Guest]: Doesn't really matter.
[Guest]: And now with working from home, you know, the work-life balance is certainly been tossed
[Guest]: out of the window.
[Guest]: So, yeah, I mean, in that it's, it's, it's about where it's been difficult as to how
[Guest]: do you, I mean, luckily I've been able to pay my bills and things have been fine.
[Guest]: But I know a large number of people who would just succumb to some incentive for corruption
[Guest]: here and there because just because they don't have their basics taken care of.
[Guest]: You look at the remuneration that counselors get, you look at the remuneration that MLAs
[Guest]: get, and to pretend that that is somehow enough for them for functioning, for running a back
[Guest]: office, for their legislative performance, their intervention when it comes to the plethora
[Guest]: of committees that they're part of is, is ridiculous.
[Guest]: So yeah, so one takeaway has been that you have to be financially independent, you have
[Guest]: to be able to raise resources, and that is still a fight in corporate India.
[Guest]: That's something that I experienced firsthand.
[Guest]: So if you want more people to participate in politics, you have to, you can't frown
[Guest]: upon a person's political affiliation.
[Guest]: A political affiliation in India, sadly, in a corporate setup is seen to be unionization,
[Guest]: which everybody has a problem with.
[Guest]: But that's not the case.
[Guest]: And again, that comes to the political culture.
[Guest]: So that's the second learning.
[Guest]: The third learning is that you always prepare for an election.
[Guest]: So an election is like that exam you've always been preparing for.
[Guest]: You know, everything that you do, every person that you reach out to, every person that you
[Guest]: engage with, is part of, is part of that effort that you are putting into for your election
[Guest]: at some point in time.
[Guest]: It's when preparation typically means opportunity.
[Guest]: And you have to be at it and you have to nurse a constituency.
[Guest]: It's all okay to basically be all around the place.
[Guest]: But if your local electorate doesn't know you, you know, what all these, all these things
[Guest]: don't matter.
[Guest]: So which is why a JP is a great guy, but at the end of the day, he is a gentleman.
[Guest]: I can't imagine JP climb over an electric pole and connect, which is a great act of
[Guest]: politics, which is a great act of politics.
[Guest]: And Arvind's brilliant because he, he wedded, he wedded symbolism with that, with that narrative.
[Guest]: So people, people actually felt that they could participate in something tangible.
[Guest]: But yeah, I think over the, over, over a period of time, it's, it's, it's, I think politics
[Guest]: is by far the most competitive business that anyone can be in.
[Guest]: I mean, think about it.
[Guest]: I think every aspect of, every aspect of human knowledge, whether it is management, whether
[Guest]: it is finance, whether it is psychology, whether it is fashion, whether it's history, geography,
[Guest]: politics, political science, all of it, you know, are needed.
[Guest]: And also the next thing is that many a times, because politics doesn't have a set trajectory,
[Guest]: okay, you joined at this age and okay, you became this at that age and you became like,
[Guest]: I always when I, when I, when I was in the Aam Aadmi Party, and when we saw those hundreds,
[Guest]: when I, I mean, when I joined the Aam Aadmi Party, and when we saw those hundreds of thousands
[Guest]: of people on the road during the Anna movement, I thought that I'll get elected in the next
[Guest]: assembly election.
[Guest]: That it was just a matter of time.
[Guest]: The people were prepared and we need to basically go there and just tell them that we exist
[Guest]: and they'll vote for us.
[Guest]: But, but yeah, the answer to that is sadly not true.
[Guest]: And that people's people do vote, but people are exacting.
[Guest]: You have to build a party structure brick by brick.
[Guest]: And there are no answers to that because you don't have existing precedents in India.
[Guest]: So many times, it's, it's really the domain of the unknown, but you just basically have
[Guest]: to be at it and last and most importantly, we need to make a distinction between people
[Guest]: and their ideas.
[Guest]: We fight ideas, we don't fight people.
[Guest]: Now, of course, my best friend Aditya Paul would disagree with me and he would tell me
[Guest]: that people's ideas are an extension of themselves and sooner or later they become that.
[Guest]: But that said, I think in politics, I have always, I've always believed about this distinction
[Guest]: between ideas and people, which is why I am, I have some very good friends in the BJP,
[Guest]: in the Congress, across the aisle.
[Guest]: And I've always said that if our generation doesn't bond together and if we aren't friends
[Guest]: and if we can't really, irrespective of whatever the political compulsions may be outside,
[Guest]: then what have we even achieved?
[Guest]: Right?
[Guest]: So, so yeah, these, these broadly basic learnings, but, but yeah, politics is brutal at the end
[Guest]: of the day.
[Guest]: Being a member of the Lok Satta Party and seeing us be defeated election after election
[Guest]: has been heartbreaking, but look at it from a, as a long haul, look at it as a long journey,
[Guest]: look at your political career from a long lens and you'll have, you have to be thick
[Guest]: skinned.
[Guest]: People will call you all sorts of things.
[Guest]: On Twitter, you'll have all sorts of trolls that will have an impact on your mental health
[Guest]: and then you have to choose that because you have very little energy and very little time,
[Guest]: how do you best utilize it?
[Guest]: And in all of this, these are life choices.
[Guest]: Like I sometimes do end up being, being lonely.
[Guest]: I have a great mother and I have a great set of friends and et cetera, but, but yeah, so
[Guest]: far I don't have a life partner who would be okay with my life choices and the lifestyle
[Guest]: that comes with a politician who's also wears a social work hat and also dabbles in policy
[Guest]: and does this and that.
[Guest]: So, so yeah, it is, it is extremely complex, but you just have to be at it and yeah, hopefully
[Guest]: all will fall in place at some point in time.
[Amit Varma]: No much admiration.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm struck by, you know, what you said about ideas, not people.
[Amit Varma]: Like when I used to edit the policy magazine, Pragati, my principle always was that don't
[Amit Varma]: criticize parties or people just speak about ideas or policies, which is kind of what I
[Amit Varma]: would try to do.
[Amit Varma]: But how hard is it that, is that to do in this time where essentially in our discourse
[Amit Varma]: you have, what is a race to the bottom?
[Amit Varma]: Everything is so toxic.
[Amit Varma]: Everything is so incredibly personalized.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I've been attacked by IT cells of both BJP and Congress.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe if Amandipati has an IT cell, they'll come after me after this and we won't come
[Amit Varma]: after you.
[Amit Varma]: You won't come after me.
[Amit Varma]: No, I would imagine you wouldn't.
[Amit Varma]: And so in this discourse where it is a race to the bottom and shrillness wins, where everybody
[Amit Varma]: is shouting all the time, where everybody is out or nubbing a nub in a sense, how difficult
[Amit Varma]: is it then for you to kind of tailor your message?
[Amit Varma]: Or do you just say that this discourse, the shrill shouting, that's happening at a different
[Amit Varma]: level.
[Amit Varma]: It doesn't matter.
[Amit Varma]: We have to reach the people directly.
[Guest]: What is your approach?
[Guest]: A mix of many things.
[Guest]: One is, I think it starts with this belief in yourself and there is this line in the
[Guest]: party anthem.
[Guest]: It goes something like this, and that you are doing the right thing.
[Guest]: And maybe in the immediate future, maybe you're not getting traction and maybe it is difficult,
[Guest]: but you're doing the right thing.
[Guest]: And maybe you might lose an election and maybe people will laugh at us because we lost an
[Guest]: election and we couldn't garner public support and fine, and there will be multiple views
[Guest]: about it.
[Guest]: But you did the right thing and you stood and contested that election on issues that
[Guest]: actually matter.
[Guest]: That in itself is one way to look at it, one aspect.
[Guest]: The second aspect is that your existing set of distribution mechanisms for the media is
[Guest]: slowly taken over by what we see via other media, right?
[Guest]: Whether it is your content creators on YouTube, whether you see the kind of engagement on
[Guest]: Instagram and things like that, especially when it comes to this generation.
[Guest]: So there are two levels, two ways to look at it.
[Guest]: One way is that you need to consistently come up with an alternative narrative of things
[Guest]: and deliver and over a period of time, reach that position to be able to influence that
[Guest]: kind of change that you want in terms of the still narrative.
[Guest]: The third is that you see, which is why I come back to my thing, that when it comes
[Guest]: to the so-called IT cells, you have a lot of half-truths that are doing the rounds.
[Guest]: Let me give you an example.
[Guest]: Most people conflate dislike with hate.
[Guest]: It's okay to dislike a certain set of people for whatever your reasons are, but there is
[Guest]: something certainly wrong in hating them and actively discriminating against them and wishing
[Guest]: them death.
[Guest]: So that distinction suddenly is lost.
[Guest]: So it's difficult.
[Guest]: You have people who are being poisoned, who are being conditioned.
[Guest]: There is this feeling of victimhood, of somehow some historic wrongs being righted and etc.
[Guest]: So one way is to basically say that, okay, these people shouldn't be engaged at all and
[Guest]: they're not our audience.
[Guest]: The other way to say is, okay, for whatever the reason, we acknowledge that they exist
[Guest]: for you in your view of the world, real or imagined.
[Guest]: But you engage with them and you engage with them over a period of time.
[Guest]: They will change and they will vote for you.
[Guest]: So it starts with, look at how we started in Delhi.
[Guest]: When we came to power, I still remember, we would typically have everybody saying, it's
[Guest]: a new party.
[Guest]: We will vote for them.
[Guest]: They're good.
[Guest]: They're nice.
[Guest]: They're NGO people, but they will not win the election.
[Guest]: So we had that narrative.
[Guest]: Then we realized that people are ready, whether we are ready or not.
[Guest]: The first election in 2013, when we won 28 seats, people were ready.
[Guest]: But then I think we basically live in binaries.
[Guest]: We expect people to either like Modi or either like Arvind.
[Guest]: But that's not how real life is.
[Guest]: Real life is complex.
[Guest]: You have a set of people who, for whatever reason, like Modi, but they also like Arvind.
[Guest]: Now how do you, over a period of time, talk to this audience?
[Guest]: If for some reason they have a primary marker of Hindu identity, how do you come up with
[Guest]: something which is more egalitarian, something which is more natural?
[Guest]: And people might call Arvind whatever you have to call him.
[Guest]: But the fact of the matter is he's redefined Hinduism.
[Guest]: You call it personal display of religiosity.
[Guest]: You call it that, that is not meant for it or whatever.
[Guest]: But that is basically being smart.
[Guest]: You are engaging people over a period of time and you have such a bunch of poison people
[Guest]: that we hope that with the right education in a state like Delhi, with the right focus
[Guest]: on culture, with the right involvement of various communities at a mahala level and
[Guest]: all that, that will change.
[Guest]: But I'm saying this is really long term.
[Guest]: So while we are at it, while we know, and we are of course a product of our movement,
[Guest]: a lot of what we are is still a work in progress.
[Guest]: There is, while we may be responding to incentives from the electoral lens, we certainly want
[Guest]: this country to be a better place.
[Guest]: We certainly look at hate as not just counterproductive, but has to be shunned at all levels.
[Guest]: And we are working towards that.
[Guest]: It is just that in the foreseeable future, we may not see the kind of results that we
[Guest]: expect to see.
[Guest]: But in the long run, it will fall in place.
[Guest]: I know Arvind is a very empathetic, a deeply concerned human being.
[Guest]: You just see typically what he does.
[Guest]: So long story short, if you ever see him, talk to his constituents or talk to anybody
[Guest]: that comes to meet him.
[Guest]: The first thing that will strike you is his sheer empathy for the person's situation and
[Guest]: the person's problem.
[Guest]: If you see all that we've done, you can certainly argue as to, is this the role of the state?
[Guest]: Should the state be doing this?
[Guest]: But his argument has always been that, okay, the state may or may not have to do this,
[Guest]: but they're dying.
[Guest]: What do we do?
[Guest]: So we need to step in.
[Guest]: And till things are better, we need to do what it takes to ensure that things are better.
[Guest]: So this is a long project, it's a 10 year, 20 year project.
[Guest]: And I think we, at the end of it, will be able to make Indian politics a less hateful
[Amit Varma]: place.
[Amit Varma]: And very hopeful and nuanced was, let me try to kind of unpack this, what you just said
[Amit Varma]: and tell me if I've understood it correctly.
[Amit Varma]: What you're basically saying is that we cannot think of politics in simplistic terms, as
[Amit Varma]: in, so and so is a Modi supporter, so and so is a Kejriwal supporter.
[Amit Varma]: You're basically saying what I keep saying on my show that everyone contains multitudes.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, there could be a person who supports Modi for this and this reason, which
[Amit Varma]: could include bigoted reasons or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, that person also wants good governance.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, the challenge is that without necessarily, you know, attacking him on the
[Amit Varma]: front on the basis of what he supports Modi, can you appeal to the part of that voter who
[Amit Varma]: wants good governance and say that, listen, all that is fine.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, did you want your local government to function properly or not?
[Guest]: So it's that, right?
[Guest]: It's good governance.
[Guest]: Our antidote is our policy.
[Guest]: Our good governance is basically what will wean them away from this politics of hatred,
[Guest]: which right now is a substitute for that good governance.
[Guest]: It's that palliative that they're on.
[Guest]: So it's really a much more nuanced engagement of the electorate, because see, at some point
[Guest]: in time, see, we believe very strongly that the Congress is in a state of freefall, right?
[Guest]: Now with a very large number of young voters coming to the floor, and you really have a
[Guest]: lot of disruption happening at various local elections, we believe that people will come
[Guest]: to us.
[Guest]: And over a period of time, when you have the way to fight hate, is not with more hate,
[Guest]: or not to say something in an environment and be foolish by saying so.
[Guest]: You do the right thing.
[Guest]: You don't give up your principles at all.
[Guest]: I mean, fact of the matter is, what the Aam Aadmi Party has done in Delhi, I'm reasonably
[Guest]: confident no other government has.
[Guest]: But this is a 10 year project, it's a 20 year project, it will, it will take time.
[Guest]: And trust, trust the Aam Aadmi Party for that, you'll see results.
[Amit Varma]: So I almost know your answer to my next question is going to be the hopeful one out of the
[Amit Varma]: two broad options.
[Amit Varma]: But here's the thing what I and I'm just thinking aloud here that I often talk about the distinction
[Amit Varma]: between the abstract and the concrete, that when it comes to hatred, everything that is
[Amit Varma]: divisive in our politics comes from abstract notions, notions of nationhood or us versus
[Amit Varma]: them or whatever, nationalism, all those toxic things, but the things which actually make
[Amit Varma]: us liberal and bring us together are the concrete things, the everyday shared experiences and
[Amit Varma]: so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: Now, what I see here is that, in a sense, the appeal of this larger divisive agenda
[Amit Varma]: that is dominant in the country today is an appeal to abstractions.
[Amit Varma]: And would it then be fair to say that what you guys are trying to do is that you're focusing
[Amit Varma]: on the concrete, ki paani kyu nahi aata, bijli kyu mahinga hai, you know, hamare schools
[Amit Varma]: itne buri kyu hai.
[Amit Varma]: So one, is that an accurate summation and two, if that is to be the case, can voters
[Amit Varma]: be weaned away because in this age where of, you know, where narrative dominance matters
[Amit Varma]: so much, it would seem to me that narratives built around these abstractions seem to matter
[Amit Varma]: because people seem to think they take bad governance for granted, so they don't even
[Guest]: care about it.
[Guest]: No, correct.
[Guest]: So status quo is unsustainable.
[Guest]: People realize it, people, irrespective of whatever the chest-thumping that they may
[Guest]: engage in, slowly we are seeing that people are increasingly irritated.
[Guest]: People may come up with one bogey after the next and after X, they may go to Y.
[Guest]: But I think slowly that will change because while all these things are abstract concepts,
[Guest]: the othering of a particular people, the discrimination of a particular people, the unsustainability
[Guest]: of people with a particular surname in a particular area is a real concrete phenomenon.
[Guest]: The only way to fight that is through better governance, so that you make the narrative
[Guest]: itself irrelevant.
[Guest]: Not that the narrative will disappear, but the narrative then becomes irrelevant.
[Amit Varma]: Fair enough, let's kind of move on to talking about your political journey.
[Amit Varma]: Like one of the sort of, as an activist, one of the causes you took up was the laws against
[Amit Varma]: sexual harassment, like when the Keenan and Rubin case happened, for example, in 2011.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about that and the change that you managed to bring about.
[Guest]: So I think what had happened was the Mumbai Mirror did an article on me and my brother.
[Guest]: My brother had lost his phone and because the police wasn't able to find it, I traced
[Guest]: it single-handedly all the way to Gujarat and brought it back and the Mumbai Mirror
[Guest]: featured as on the front page, but very interestingly, they bungled up with my surname and called
[Unknown]: me Rubin Fernandes.
[Guest]: And the Keenan-Rubin case happened very immediately on the heels of this article appearing.
[Guest]: So a lot of people thought I had died.
[Guest]: And people started calling my mother and etc. and people would ask her and my mother would
[Guest]: basically say that, you know, you should do something about this.
[Guest]: I really didn't have the mental bandwidth at that time because I still very clearly
[Guest]: remember in 2011, the Anna Hazare fast had got over in August and after 11-12 days, I
[Guest]: had fallen sick and I needed, you know, some time just for myself because it was just so
[Guest]: much that was happening.
[Guest]: And my initial response was something would have happened and I remember one day I was
[Guest]: asleep at home and, you know, my friend Sagar Bekal who is also a member of the Litmus Test
[Guest]: Project comes to me and says that there is uncle, Valerian uncle, who is Keenan's dad
[Guest]: and he's standing down and he wants to meet you.
[Guest]: And I looked at the watch and I said, it's 1.30, he's like, no, he wants to meet you.
[Guest]: So I go down and he tells me, you do so much for anti-corruption, can you please do this
[Guest]: for me?
[Guest]: And I said, what happened, uncle?
[Guest]: This is an open and shut case, there is so much of media scrutiny, it'll fall in place.
[Guest]: And the guy broke down and he said, no, I'll take you to what happened, I'll reconstruct
[Guest]: the case for you.
[Guest]: And we went to the spot.
[Guest]: And this was in this area in Amboli, Andheri West, I was there and we were, I was looking
[Guest]: at the surroundings, sorry, I was looking at the scene of crime and sorry, it just gives
[Guest]: me goosebumps even now and basically two young men were basically hanging out with their
[Guest]: friends after the cricket match outside a restaurant as most of us would.
[Guest]: And there was somebody, a group of boys who came and molested one of their friends and
[Guest]: they obviously asked the guys to, you know, scram.
[Guest]: And they came back and they killed both those people in, I mean, 8pm in Andheri is broad
[Guest]: daylight.
[Guest]: And the sad part was that not one person amongst the hundreds of people who were spectators,
[Guest]: people in the bus, not one person even called the police, okay, I can understand if people
[Guest]: are moving around with knives, you will be scared for your life and maybe you would not
[Guest]: want to get yourself involved.
[Guest]: And I think I, it just completely, I mean, it could have been me, it could have been
[Guest]: anyone else.
[Guest]: And a lot of people thought it was me because it would be something that I would have responded
[Guest]: to in a similar situation if somebody would have misbehaved with one of my women friends.
[Guest]: So we took that, so again, me being me, I did some research and then we realised that
[Guest]: there is 354 and 509 and both are sections of the IPC, the 354 was a bailable offence,
[Guest]: which is essentially people could basically just pay 1200 rupees a stable bail and walk
[Guest]: out after molesting women.
[Guest]: So we said that we should change that.
[Guest]: Let's, let's speak about justice for Keenan and Rubin, but let's, let's see the bigger
[Guest]: cause as to why did they have to give up their lives to begin with.
[Guest]: So we landed this campaign, the Zero Tolerance campaign, we got over a lakh signatures at
[Guest]: that point in time.
[Guest]: RR Patil was the Home Minister, Prithviraj Chavan, the Chief Minister, the then Chief
[Guest]: Minister invited us, they passed, they amended in Maharashtra and then you had the Justice
[Guest]: Varma report post Nirbhaya, which then has the 354 ABCD and implemented it across the
[Guest]: country as one of the so-called reforms.
[Guest]: But yeah, I think that case in itself, the fact that despite media attention, uncle was
[Guest]: still threatened, despite media attention, I mean, all kinds of things happened.
[Guest]: I mean, we asked for a fast trial court, the trial took six years, excruciating years.
[Guest]: And I remember Keenan's grandmother just died right now and she would just cry and they
[Guest]: would reach out to me and they would not have closure because they lost two young men.
[Guest]: And yeah, I think that case really taught me so much that beyond all these statistics,
[Guest]: there are really human stories.
[Guest]: And if even such high profile cases have so many impediments when it comes to justice,
[Guest]: then one can only imagine what's happening with others.
[Guest]: So yeah.
[Guest]: So on that note, just for the record, we managed to get a conviction where the perpetrators
[Guest]: are now convicted for life.
[Guest]: So not a life imprisonment for 14 years, but they will basically be in prison till their
[Guest]: deaths.
[Guest]: And we managed to get the scenes in the law.
[Guest]: And of course, now we are working on the preventive aspect of things so that you have more people
[Guest]: being educated, more people being informed of consent culture, of what is appropriate
[Guest]: behavior, what is not, working with the police.
[Guest]: So that's something else.
[Guest]: So one of the most important projects of ZTC is to set up Dakshata Samitis.
[Guest]: So you have your local police stations, the local police stations were again, a product
[Guest]: of a post-mutiny legislation.
[Guest]: So that was never meant to look at Indians as collaborators with the state and the government
[Guest]: to uphold law and order.
[Guest]: It was always meant for crowd control.
[Guest]: It was always meant for systematic suppression.
[Guest]: And I think that is somehow even there right now, where you do not have a say in what the
[Guest]: police station does.
[Guest]: So you have these Dakshata Samitis, which are local memberhood groups who come together.
[Guest]: Like I'm part of one citizens group in Juhu, where we meet month after month and discuss
[Guest]: with the police, bring up issues of law and order, of robberies, or whatever illegalities
[Guest]: that happen there and the police respond.
[Guest]: So we want to have these Dakshata Samitis where, we're going to call it the Keenan Rubin
[Guest]: Dakshata Samitis.
[Guest]: Let's see, that's again a proposal with the Mumbai police that we're working on.
[Guest]: But yeah, that's, that's, that's...
[Amit Varma]: If you do call the Dakshata committees that people will say you named it after yourself
[Amit Varma]: and we'll have come full circle, you know.
[Amit Varma]: In our informal conversation, in the middle of this recording, you were talking about
[Amit Varma]: the Bandra School of Activism and the Juhu School of Activism.
[Guest]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: What are those?
[Guest]: Activism in Mumbai started with the ALM movement.
[Guest]: And the ALM movement is basic advanced locality management, that's the acronym for ALM.
[Amit Varma]: Not all lives matter.
[Guest]: No, but it started off with people segregating their garbage, and because people were segregating
[Guest]: the garbage, they were interfacing and interacting with a large number of elected representatives,
[Guest]: PMC officials, and they said that, look, if we're working on garbage, why can't we work
[Guest]: about work on other issues and stuff like that.
[Guest]: And you had this activism, which was born, then you had the RTI, and RTI became like
[Guest]: this most important tool with activists to essentially get their problems solved.
[Guest]: And there was a way to file these RTIs and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: So activism started by people who were retired, largely had time on their hands.
[Guest]: It was a young thing.
[Guest]: I mean, I still remember people would really say, oh, you're extreme, you're a child.
[Guest]: And this was even when I was 18 and 19 and all of that.
[Guest]: So I think it started off with a bunch of retired people who want to do something on
[Guest]: their free time.
[Guest]: And this seemed like an interesting thing, which gave them access to power, which gave
[Guest]: them access to BMC, and which gave them access to whatever these administrative mechanisms
[Guest]: in the area, areas, and they also was a little vanity that you get some recognition, etc.
[Guest]: So broadly, that's been how activism started.
[Guest]: Then you had what I call a divergence in the Bandra School of Activism and the Juhu School
[Guest]: of Activism.
[Guest]: Now the Juhu School of Activism led by the Hansel D'Souza, the Praful Vora and the Adolf
[Guest]: D'Souza of the world said that, no, we should contest the election and they tasted blood
[Guest]: and they got elected.
[Guest]: So now they start talking about accountability.
[Guest]: So it's not about, okay, you engage people because you have to engage everybody.
[Guest]: So you engage all levels of government, you engage all elected representatives, but you
[Guest]: are ultimately working that, okay, at some point in time, can we get our guy elected?
[Guest]: You know, that is the Juhu School of Thought.
[Guest]: The Bandra School of Thought feels that, oh, we are apolitical, and we somehow need to
[Guest]: keep ourselves like that.
[Guest]: And we should not, we should not, you know, join a political party and do something like
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: But slowly, the Bandra School of Activism has reduced over a period of time.
[Guest]: And I've always basically believed that, and I tell this to the Agni people and the entire
[Guest]: activist brigade, that, hey, man, you guys are old, and you need to pass the baton to
[Guest]: young people.
[Guest]: And you need to create this problem solving community of young people.
[Guest]: If you, right now, this problem solving community is a very small community.
[Guest]: It's the same people cleaning the beach, it is the same people saving the metro, and it
[Guest]: is the same people saving RA, and it is the same people doing whatever next problem that
[Guest]: the city faces.
[Guest]: So unless and until you're not going to expand it and get young people, all that progress
[Guest]: over the last 20-25 years in Mumbai would just basically be lost.
[Guest]: So that is something that I'm presently working on.
[Guest]: First is an RTI portal.
[Guest]: So we're trying to create an RTI portal using AI, so people can solve problems in a better
[Guest]: way by asking better questions.
[Guest]: Wow.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So that should basically be launched sometime this year.
[Guest]: Of course, it's post-COVID, so everything's disrupted.
[Guest]: So we don't know when, but we'll hopefully prepare a date.
[Guest]: The second is a model BMC, which, again, is about rather than doing a model United Nations,
[Guest]: you speak about model BMC.
[Guest]: So you speak about, you take five aspects of BMC, you speak about water, garbage, health,
[Guest]: education, water and sanitation, and you actually go in communities and solve these problems
[Guest]: real time.
[Guest]: So rather than somebody giving you a presentation, you actually go there and say, okay, you go
[Guest]: to that particular community, you understand what their problems are and solve that problem.
[Guest]: So you actually see the life cycle real time.
[Guest]: You actually get an orientation, okay, how does the city work and how can you engage
[Guest]: with the city so that you at least know how the city works so that you can get it to work
[Guest]: for a community issue.
[Guest]: So that is, again, something that we wish to launch this year.
[Amit Varma]: That's like a flagship.
[Amit Varma]: How do you juggle all this?
[Guest]: You're an engineer, right?
[Guest]: So what, do you have a job right now?
[Guest]: I have a job, I consult for a consultancy firm.
[Amit Varma]: Wow.
[Amit Varma]: Okay.
[Amit Varma]: So moving on to the, you know, the next big project that one associates you with, there
[Amit Varma]: is this common notion in India that listen, one of the reasons our politics cannot be
[Amit Varma]: reformed is that voters are apathetic, people don't vote, look at the numbers.
[Amit Varma]: And you fundamentally didn't agree with that and were one of the people who started this
[Amit Varma]: Jago Ray campaign.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a bit about that.
[Guest]: So Jago Ray was started by Janagraha in 2008.
[Guest]: I was still in college, we were part of the Lok Satta movement back then.
[Guest]: And this was a movement far ahead of its times, because I remember in the name of IT, back
[Guest]: then they would just have five computers, so that is like an IT enabled college.
[Guest]: And obviously you didn't have an online voter services portal like we have right now, where
[Guest]: you can just go online and you can just put everything there and you can actually track
[Guest]: what happened to your application.
[Guest]: So this was, this was just like a black box, right?
[Guest]: You would just fill a form 6, which is what the form for first time registration is, and
[Guest]: you would send it.
[Guest]: And you don't know what happened after that, it's either a hit or a miss.
[Guest]: So Jago Ray said that, okay, there is a problem because while most people turn 18 and, you
[Guest]: know, want to run to basically get a license, nobody wants to go and get registered.
[Guest]: So that's the problem, so can we at least get young people interested in politics?
[Guest]: So that was something back then, though, even then, I would still get the question as to,
[Guest]: okay, we got ourselves registered, whom do we vote for?
[Guest]: So yeah, so Jago Ray in many ways was like a precursor to politics, because yeah, you
[Guest]: had to engage young people, you had to tell them that they had to register and that their
[Guest]: vote actually matters.
[Guest]: So yeah, we registered quite a few people.
[Guest]: I think that is still the record in Maharashtra and Gujarat.
[Guest]: And yeah, we oversaw that, and that was 2009.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So it's almost like building demand before the supply is there.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: But interestingly, I still remember during Jago Ray, you had the 26th, 11 terrorist attacks
[Guest]: and on the website, we saw traffic just increase.
[Guest]: So we had a lot of young people who are otherwise apathetic saying that at least, there is anger.
[Guest]: But of course, all of this is a manifestation of systemic failure for a long period of time,
[Guest]: incapacity, etc.
[Guest]: But that was like, as bad as it can get, like 300 hours of live terror.
[Guest]: And yeah, I think Jago Ray was, in many ways, a registration problem, which is a first generation
[Guest]: problem.
[Guest]: You know, what we did with the election commission was a second generation problem.
[Guest]: But now that people are registered, how do we mobilize them?
[Guest]: Because the assumption that just because you registered, you would, because you were active
[Guest]: enough to, you know, involved enough to register, you will also vote is not true.
[Guest]: Most people, again, through our studies, we found that people looked at it as another
[Guest]: identity card.
[Guest]: Like a very middle class thing, if you are meeting the government, then take it, kind
[Guest]: of attitude.
[Guest]: But yeah, I think that sort of dovetailed into what we did with the election commission.
[Guest]: And yeah, that's results are there for all to see.
[Amit Varma]: So before I kind of go to my next question, a brief digression, you know, you were part
[Amit Varma]: of Lok Sattar to start with, you know, you were with JP.
[Amit Varma]: And then you've said before in the past that you even tried to bring JP and Arvind together
[Amit Varma]: as so many people did, but that never worked out.
[Amit Varma]: Why didn't they work out?
[Guest]: What were the fundamental problems there?
[Guest]: No, I don't first think that when I said work out was, we thought that Lok Sattar would
[Guest]: merge into an app.
[Guest]: But I think right now, JP has taken a decision that he wants to continue with the policy
[Guest]: advocacy way, because he feels that he'll be able to create much more impact there than
[Guest]: the political way, which really requires much more than just a logical argument.
[Guest]: So that's that.
[Guest]: So that is the reason why it didn't work.
[Guest]: But all said and done, I think that it's not true that JP and Arvind don't work together.
[Guest]: I think JP is very closely involved with the policy team, the last I heard.
[Guest]: So his feedback from somebody as nuanced and with such experience as him is definitely
[Guest]: important.
[Guest]: So we're already working on that front.
[Guest]: But yeah, politics requires, a short version of that is a lot of the Lok Sattar people
[Guest]: thought that change will just suddenly happen one day, because suddenly people will have
[Guest]: this moral impulse and people would recognize that we are the right party and people will
[Guest]: vote for us.
[Guest]: But that's not how it was.
[Guest]: We saw what happened in Hyderabad, where there was a lot of love, and I use the term love
[Guest]: and not respect.
[Guest]: There was a lot of love and respect for JP across the board, but when it came to replicating
[Guest]: that win, so the only person from Lok Sattar who ever won was Jayaprakash Narayan, nobody
[Guest]: else has ever won anything, both at a council level and both at the state level or multiple
[Guest]: states for that matter.
[Guest]: There were forays being made into Uttar Pradesh, there were forays being made into Maharashtra,
[Guest]: etc.
[Guest]: And it was heartbreaking at a point in time, but you move on.
[Guest]: You need not just a leader who is charismatic, but you need a leader who is able to get large
[Guest]: talent density around you.
[Guest]: And then you have to have that dogged approach over a period of time.
[Guest]: And you have to basically, so like a JP wouldn't believe in symbolism.
[Guest]: JP would basically say that, hey, I can just sit down and I can just have a conversation.
[Guest]: But the common people are not like that.
[Guest]: They want some symbolism to be able to associate with abstract concepts of governance.
[Guest]: It's all good.
[Guest]: You know, when we talk about governance and say you vote for us and we will get elected
[Guest]: and if we get elected in the right number, then we form the government and then we'll
[Guest]: formulate policy and then we'll implement policy and if that policy is implemented well,
[Guest]: then your life will change.
[Guest]: So that's a little far fetched.
[Guest]: But if you do that with the right symbolism and say the right things, because it still
[Guest]: has to be symptomatic.
[Guest]: So a JP would say that Arvind Kejriwal's running after corruption is symptomatic, you know,
[Guest]: the problem is bigger.
[Guest]: But Arvind Kejriwal would say the common people understand just that.
[Guest]: So you start by saying that, you know why your bills are high?
[Guest]: It is because of corruption.
[Guest]: And if you do X, Y and Z, we can do this better and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: So I think that is the fundamental difference between a JP and an Arvind.
[Guest]: But I still think that both are phenomenal sons of India and I look up to both of them
[Guest]: as some phenomenal leaders.
[Guest]: And my dream somewhere, if you ask me, at least when I started, would be, you know,
[Guest]: an Arvind as the popular face and a JP as the brain.
[Guest]: I think some, we've achieved it to some extent, but I hope that it happens completely sooner
[Amit Varma]: or later.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And would it then be fair to say that if you are sort of pursuing a path of clean politics,
[Amit Varma]: part of your mindset has to be to forget about the results and think about the process that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you just focus on constantly growing through the daily grind of politics and not
[Amit Varma]: focus too much on the results as in, oh, change will happen or, oh, we will win elections
[Guest]: or whatever.
[Guest]: No.
[Guest]: So Arvind is very clear.
[Guest]: He says that I'm not here to be an also rant.
[Guest]: I want to contest elections.
[Guest]: I want to contest elections by disrupting the space, by doing the right thing.
[Guest]: Because all said and done, and Arvind has demonstrated that Aam Aadmi Party can win
[Guest]: elections with the least resources without resorting to the tactics that our competitors
[Guest]: resort to.
[Guest]: So it is extremely important to look at it as a no-nonsense game.
[Guest]: If I'm contesting the upcoming elections, I will contest to win.
[Guest]: I am not here for time pass.
[Guest]: And sometimes that gets difficult, given the fact that you have limited resources, given
[Guest]: the fact that not many people are even willing to, you know, keep their, get out of their
[Guest]: comfort zones and actually take to a life of politics with the kind of uncertainties
[Guest]: that they are.
[Guest]: So the answer is that you need both.
[Guest]: You need your eyes on the goal.
[Guest]: It's important.
[Guest]: You can't.
[Guest]: And Arvind is that leader who, I still remember when the Lok Sabha results came, we thought
[Guest]: that all was lost.
[Guest]: And Arvind actually calmed everybody down and went booth by booth and set up an organization
[Guest]: and we won the election.
[Amit Varma]: No, that's actually what I meant when I spoke about the hard grind in the process was exactly
[Guest]: what you guys are doing, that you have to go through the process anyway and others might
[Guest]: get disheartened.
[Guest]: But you have to have your eyes on the goal.
[Guest]: So you can't blindly go through the process and, you know, say that it would eventually
[Guest]: yield results.
[Guest]: It has to yield results.
[Guest]: If it's not yielding results, you basically need to, it's like a startup, right?
[Guest]: If you have to be nimble, you have to be agile, if things are not working, then you need to
[Guest]: change your strategy.
[Amit Varma]: No, and I understand JP's thoughts on sort of symbolism as well, because, you know, when
[Amit Varma]: India against corruption happened, I remember writing a column at that point where it struck
[Amit Varma]: me that the whole campaign misunderstood the fundamental cause of corruption.
[Amit Varma]: Corruption of course was a symptom, but what was it a symptom of, which was too much discretion
[Amit Varma]: given to the state, which will obviously then lead to corruption.
[Amit Varma]: So the way out is to reduce the discretion of the state.
[Guest]: But what IAC was asking for was, what IAC was asking about was basically the Jan Lok
[Guest]: Paal Bill was a much more effective mechanism to tackle corruption, but you're not reducing
[Amit Varma]: the discretion.
[Guest]: No, no, let me explain.
[Guest]: Let me explain.
[Guest]: So you, this is the example that JP always gives that 10% of the people will always do
[Guest]: good.
[Guest]: 10% of the people will always do bad.
[Guest]: And the remaining 80% of the people who will follow those 10% who are being rewarded.
[Guest]: So right now you have 90% of the country being corrupt because you have an incentive for
[Guest]: corruption.
[Guest]: You will save time.
[Guest]: You will save energy.
[Guest]: You will save money if you chose to resort to corruption.
[Guest]: That if suddenly you make it easier for people to do good and difficult for people to do
[Guest]: bad, which is what the Jan Lok Paal Bill in essence was, then suddenly the country from
[Guest]: being 90% corrupt, the 80% would follow the 10% who were being rewarded, which in this
[Guest]: case, I think the only way to do that is actually to reduce.
[Amit Varma]: You disagree with what I just said?
[Amit Varma]: No, I agree with the theoretical point that a mechanism like this would be great, except
[Amit Varma]: that it wouldn't work because you'd be giving another layer of people more discretion.
[Amit Varma]: I think the only way to reduce corruption is to reduce discretion.
[Amit Varma]: The state has too much arbitrary power.
[Amit Varma]: And if you reduce that in all the areas where it doesn't need to be there, then you know,
[Amit Varma]: like needing 60 licenses to open a business, for example, you automatically reduce corruption
[Amit Varma]: to say that no, let the state have all this power and we'll have another committee of
[Amit Varma]: unelected people on top of that is to give power to another bunch of people.
[Guest]: This is in the context of Jan Lok Paal per se, but I think look at what we've done when
[Unknown]: it, we don't have control over the ACB.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: So technically we don't even have the police force that, you know, we can actually get
[Guest]: a vigilance to follow up on cases.
[Guest]: But what we've done is right to services, which we've now said that certain services
[Guest]: are deemed.
[Guest]: We've been able to revamp the whole system that right now we are able to provide free
[Guest]: healthcare.
[Guest]: We are able to save money on project extensions for large projects and make sure that medicines
[Guest]: are free.
[Guest]: Right now, if you are not able to get yourself an operation that is prescribed by a doctor
[Guest]: within a stipulated period of time, you can go to a private place and get it done free
[Guest]: of cost.
[Guest]: So all of this is, is reducing corruption, just the manner in which these reforms are
[Amit Varma]: being implemented.
[Amit Varma]: Sure.
[Amit Varma]: And I don't want to litigate that.
[Amit Varma]: That was an aside.
[Amit Varma]: Oh, my final question to you.
[Amit Varma]: Actually, my second last question to you, I would ask you two questions.
[Amit Varma]: I've taken enough of your time.
[Amit Varma]: My second last question is this that, you know, one of the things that kind of saddens
[Amit Varma]: me is that JP left politics because, you know, in the sense that he is one of my intellectual
[Amit Varma]: heroes, and when someone like that is in politics, and you can look at politics and say that
[Amit Varma]: there is hope to do good, but okay, I understand it happened.
[Amit Varma]: So here's my hypothetical question to you.
[Amit Varma]: You've chosen politics as your life's work, clearly.
[Amit Varma]: Is there any hypothetical situation in which you would say, nahi karna, bahut ho gaya?
[Guest]: No, that is just not an option.
[Guest]: Because that's, that's, that's the easier option.
[Guest]: I mean, I could have, in life, I've had to take a lot of decisions, which have ended
[Guest]: to be life choices, which a lot of my other friends would basically disagree with.
[Guest]: But it's something that gives me satisfaction, and you have to be committed to the choices
[Guest]: that you make.
[Guest]: So this is a life choice, which we will continue.
[Guest]: And no matter, right now, we are on the ascendant, and it looks good.
[Guest]: Maybe at some point in time, it may look bad.
[Guest]: But yeah, this is, this is something that I will dedicate my life to.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, you're on the ascendant, I'm not sure the country is, but more power to you.
[Amit Varma]: I hope you can actually make the difference you want to make.
[Amit Varma]: And my final question is that given the range of possibilities before us, because, again,
[Amit Varma]: none of us are in a simplistic way, only optimistic or only pessimistic, we recognize that there
[Amit Varma]: is a range of possibilities in that range.
[Amit Varma]: If you look at the India of the year 2030, what do you think is the best case scenario
[Guest]: and the worst case scenario?
[Guest]: I think the worst case scenario is, if you typically see what happened to the Vajpayee
[Guest]: turns into Advani, turns into Modi, turns into whatever next, I think I leave that to
[Guest]: the imagination of our listeners.
[Guest]: So that's the worst case scenario.
[Guest]: The best case scenario would basically be, I would say, a coalition of a lot of regional
[Guest]: parties coming together.
[Guest]: Even right now, the mood of the nation poll basically said that Aravind is the next most
[Guest]: popular leader against, I mean, after Narendra Modi.
[Guest]: So and I've always believed that a coalition government, even if it historically has done
[Guest]: much more work on reforms than single party governments, if you studied all the governments
[Guest]: per se.
[Guest]: So I think the best case scenario would basically be a coalition government with multiple regional
[Guest]: parties, and I think that is much better than where we are right now.
[Guest]: I think anything is much better than where we are right now.
[Guest]: Nationally, I've reached that stage, right?
[Guest]: Anybody but Modi.
[Guest]: And I think everyone else has reached that stage.
[Guest]: So yeah, between best case and worst case.
[Amit Varma]: Fascinating.
[Guest]: But yeah, but the best case for us would also be sending much more MPs to the house.
[Guest]: I think slowly down the line, we are being able to make inroads in a few states.
[Guest]: It would be also controlling a few more state governments, where you would have a full state
[Guest]: as opposed to Delhi.
[Guest]: And maybe then your criticisms wouldn't hold because we'll be able to demonstrate much
[Amit Varma]: more.
[Amit Varma]: I hope so.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And my criticisms, I have to say, comes from a natural skepticism of politics, not of a
[Guest]: particular politician.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, you're standing for, you're probably standing for elections in the upcoming
[Amit Varma]: Mumbai municipal election.
[Amit Varma]: So best of luck for that.
[Amit Varma]: And also, why the municipal elections?
[Amit Varma]: Like in 2014, you went all out and said, okay, we'll just stand everywhere and take a shot
[Unknown]: the Yadav plan and that was a mistake in hindsight.
[Amit Varma]: Is this a new kind of bottoms up approach or is this one where you say individually
[Amit Varma]: as individual politicians, it's better that you play the Kanga League first and the Ranji
[Amit Varma]: Trophy and then inshallah you play Test cricket?
[Guest]: No.
[Guest]: So I think it's a mix of both.
[Guest]: One is from a political party standpoint, you have to see, you can't have a set of people
[Guest]: vote for you.
[Guest]: And then in the next election, tell them, hey, we're not contesting.
[Guest]: So you better figure out who you want to vote for.
[Guest]: It doesn't work that way.
[Guest]: You are a member of, I mean, you are a political party, you started something, people will
[Guest]: expect you to give candidates, number one.
[Guest]: So you have to have continuity.
[Guest]: Understand how the Shiv Sena is where it is.
[Guest]: They contested elections time and again and there were various experiments at basically
[Guest]: increasing their vote shares, so on and so forth.
[Guest]: So that's one.
[Guest]: Second is, most people think like, you know, like all my friends told me, why are you running
[Guest]: for a councillor?
[Guest]: I mean, MLA toh at least hona chahiye na itna saal politics mein plus yeh hua, woh hua.
[Guest]: And I would, my response to that is that it's okay to be humble, to start something where
[Guest]: the possibility of you winning of this clean politics actually working is higher, because
[Guest]: typically you just need about 7 to 8000 votes to win, which is much smaller a number than
[Guest]: a 65 or 70,000 votes at an assembly.
[Guest]: So yeah, so I think we start small and we contest all elections.
[Guest]: And in Mumbai, we had at one point in time, a very large support.
[Guest]: I think even now, our internal surveys put us at a reasonable number.
[Guest]: So yeah, it is about consolidating all that goodwill, building a structure, building an
[Guest]: organization, because without an organization, all this goodwill exists, but it will not
[Guest]: convert into votes.
[Guest]: So yeah, so it's, we're in for the long haul.
[Guest]: It's maybe I might become a middle aged MLA, hopefully, may not be a young MLA, but it'll
[Amit Varma]: happen at some point.
[Amit Varma]: Listen, as long as Rahul Gandhi is in Indian politics, you will always be young.
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah, 55 year old young man.
[Amit Varma]: So Ruben, thanks so much for coming on the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I know we've been a little combative, but I have enormous respect and affection for
[Amit Varma]: you.
[Guest]: And it's such a joy to have you on the show.
[Guest]: Thank you.
[Guest]: Thank you so much.
[Guest]: I hope I've made myself amply clear and thank you for this opportunity.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, head on over to Twitter to follow Ruben at
[Amit Varma]: Rubenmask.
[Amit Varma]: That's R-U-B-E-N-M-A-S-K.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: And you can browse past episodes of the scene and the unseen at sceneunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: Bye.